(0:12 - 0:20)
All right, so now we're moving on to 50-50. This is a symmetrical leg position. Your legs are exposed and their legs are exposed.

(0:21 - 1:13)
The big mistake people make when they're attacking and defending 50-50 is they either get caught in a purely offensive or purely defensive mindset, and both can be detrimental. One of the biggest mistakes I see with people trying to attack from 50-50 is they get so overzealous attacking their partner's legs, they leave their own leg exposed, and now from here they get heel-hooked trying to attack their partner's legs, forgetting about their own legs. Or, on the flip side of that coin, they're so overly defensive that they find themselves defending so much here or here or here, taking a two-on-one or here, that they're so overly defensive there's no threat whatsoever to their partner, either positionally or by submissions, and they find themselves in this defensive loop where they get caught for three, four, five minutes at a time just in defensive cycles where their partner has nothing to worry about besides attacking them.

(1:14 - 1:43)
There has to be a balance of offence and defence. You can't just be offensive and forget about your own legs and get counter-locked, and you can't just be defensive and completely forget about attacking your partner and just expect to have your partner not relentlessly attack you if they don't respect you. You need to have some kind of offence and a strong defensive posture to be able to make them respect you and even threaten their legs to get them to either extract their leg completely and be reset to neutral, or you can pass legs across, you can extract your own leg.

(1:43 - 2:01)
There needs to be a healthy balance of offensive and defensive posture when you're playing 50-50. All right, so there's going to be a couple different leg positions we can play with. Most commonly, you and your partner will have either one.

(2:01 - 2:19)
You can go foot-to-foot, but this is pretty easy to separate. Most of the time, you'll see a full cross of the ankles, the semi-syncopic like so, or you'll see a full figure-four like so. And so we talked about the pros and cons of a full figure-four versus just crossed ankles in attacking leg locks.

(2:19 - 2:34)
I'm not going to go over that here, but just know that in general, if you're going to have two different leg positions, one would just be crossed ankles. You can go foot-to-foot too, separate the same way, crossed ankles or foot-to-foot, or from here, a full figure-four like so. So just a general initial leg positions that you'll play in with your partner.

(2:39 - 2:58)
Okay, so there's actually two different positions we're going to hide the heel in here. One is if your leg is bent, which you want, and the other is in a crisis situation where your partner's trying to dig for your heel at range when your leg's extended, and we have to hide our heel out there. So first, most of the time, I want my heel in like so.

(2:58 - 3:15)
Close to my butt. In other different variations of Ashigarami, a lot of time looking to extend the leg away and looking to move in situations like this where the leg is relatively straight. And now from here, we're going into heel slips.

(3:15 - 3:27)
For this one, I'm actually looking to pull my butt in towards me like so. Okay, or my heel in towards me like so. If my partner starts to extend my leg and I end up out here, I can't have this.

(3:27 - 3:45)
My toe's pointing towards my partner, and from here, we go in and we get beat. Here, when I have my heel in like so, I actually want my toes pointing in the opposite direction than we normally would where my heel isn't close to my partner's butt and isn't close to my partner's body. And from here, my toes are pointing towards her ribcage.

(3:46 - 4:04)
Because now, even if she does expose my heel, it means nothing because her head and her elbow are too close to me, which we'll look at in a second. But if I see I'm in a more of a crisis scenario where I'm out far and away, now I want my heel connected to her body, my toes pointing out and away from my partner. So there's two different scenarios that we want in this position.

(4:05 - 4:32)
With most ashi garamis, she wants, like an outside ashi garami, for example, she wants her body relatively bent and crunched up towards me. And now from here, she'll start going into breaks, and the shoulders will stay relatively concave from here, and the body will stay bent like so. And 50-50, the closer she is to me, the easier it is for me to access and hand fight.

(4:32 - 4:55)
So she actually wants more of an extension out in this position like so, where her body starts to move into a straightened position, her legs move into a straightened position, and everything starts to move into a straight line rather than more crunched up like we traditionally have with other ashi garamis. So there's some differences here, all right? So there's two different scenarios that we hide our feet in. One is like so, where the heel is not connected to our partner's body.

(4:56 - 5:07)
And from here, our toes point relatively close towards our partner like so. This is when our leg is bent. Two, from here, our leg is straight, more straightened.

(5:07 - 5:16)
And then from here, she's digging for my heel. From here, I tuck my heel in towards my partner's ribcage. I point my toes away, like more of the traditional heel slipping defensive posture that we have.

(5:16 - 5:29)
Okay, so two different scenarios here, depending on where my partner is. If she's close to me, like so, I have my legs and my foot in this position. If I feel her digging for my heel, now my toes don't point towards her anymore.

(5:29 - 5:42)
Obviously, I have to point my toes away like so. That will make it harder for her to dig and harder for her to expose my heel. But if I'm just resting in this position like so, my feet are locked in like so, my foot's like this.

(5:42 - 5:54)
The second my foot becomes separated, this is okay. The second she goes to dig, now I'm pointing my toes away and my heel is still disconnected. I can't have, from here, my toes pointing towards her if she's digging for my heel.

(5:55 - 6:06)
So initially, I'm just in here and then I point. If she extends my leg, I turn everything down and away. I tuck my heel in and I point my toes away like so, like we always do.

(6:06 - 6:20)
I have my toes pointing away from my partner and making it hard for her to go in and dig for the heel. Okay, so understand we're looking to extract our legs in 50-50. What holds me in place is the bend in my leg.

(6:20 - 6:39)
So at any point, my partner tries to transfer from 50-50 into an outside ashi grommet, for example, and she takes it centre chest. Or if I just do something, if you get my leg centre chest, from here, it's much easier to pull my leg straight out and away than if it's bent. What holds me in place is the bent leg.

(6:39 - 7:02)
Okay, so if my leg is straight and it's on the centre line, the pretty easy thing, easier relative to when your leg is bent, to start posting on your partner's shin like so. And now from here, as she goes to hold me, I just invert my knee like so and I pull my leg out and away. Once my leg's out and away, now the whole thing is I don't want her reclaiming my knee.

(7:03 - 7:14)
So I don't try to pull my leg out and then she just swoops back in and she controls my knee. Once my knee is on the floor, I keep it on the floor. Now from here, as she goes to start reclaiming my knee and climbing back up, it's going to be difficult.

(7:14 - 7:27)
And now we can start doing things where we come up to the inside position. We can start doing things where we come up to the inside position. We can start doing things where we take our knee to the inside position, start splitting our partner's legs, and then we get our feet back to the inside.

(7:28 - 7:49)
Okay, so at any point, my leg comes to centre chest, whether through my undoing or through her passing it, and we end up here, from here, it's going to be hard to access the hamstring from here. If the knees are into the chest, then sure, I'm just posting the hamstring and then we just extract our leg. Most people will have a better osteodermic than that, and we'll end up here.

(7:50 - 7:57)
We're posting like so. From here, as she takes a centre chest, the whole thing is I can't go straight out. I have to invert the knee.

(7:58 - 8:14)
I take my right knee and I invert it like I'm trying to pull my right knee down towards the floor, like so. Now when she goes to climb back up my leg and recapture my knee, it's going to be difficult. Now we can use that time allowed to start bringing our knee to the inside.

(8:14 - 8:23)
We use that time allowed to start pummeling feet to the inside and giving her trouble. Now from here, our feet are in the inside position. We can extract our leg and get out and get back to neutral.

(8:24 - 8:41)
At any time in centre chest, that makes an extraction much easier because the leg isn't bent anymore. It's straight and on the centre line. Okay, so now we're going to go to a scenario where we're in 50-50.

(8:42 - 8:54)
She has her ankles crossed, and from here, I want to separate them. We looked at this in attacking leg locks, but we should look at it in defending leg locks as well because it is important and you need to have this balance between attacking and defending. From here, we're going to go in.

(8:55 - 9:08)
We catch the sole of our partner's foot like so. We catch our partner's heel like so, like we did before, and we're just going to start to separate our partner's feet. Now, a lot of times, you can just separate by pulling and pushing and shearing the legs apart.

(9:08 - 9:21)
If your partner is so uber strong and the connection is so strong that you just feel like you can't do it, don't make it your hands versus their legs. Make it your whole body moving away and your hands versus their legs. So it's a full body involved.

(9:21 - 9:40)
So when she goes to lock up tight, a scoot away will pull your partner's legs apart, and I have different varying options where you want to go as far as pulling your leg out, attacking their legs, or whatever you want to do from here. So she locks her legs up, we go in, we grab one, we grab two. Again, if the foot's on the floor, just point your knee up.

(9:40 - 9:56)
That gives you access. And now from here, I just scoot away, I shear the legs off, now I have my options on where I want to go. All right, so once we actually separate our partner's ankles from here, it's much easier to extract our legs.

(9:57 - 10:09)
Because of the fact that the legs are open, I can look to start freeing my knee now. Right now, if she pinches her knees together, I can't free my knee. If I open my legs to try to extract my legs, she's going to heel hook me from here.

(10:09 - 10:22)
So from here, I keep my legs crossed, obviously, so I don't get beat. I can never just hang out here and have my feet, my foot dangling out and then she goes to attack me. I always have my feet crossed in some fashion so they're hidden.

(10:23 - 10:42)
From here, we separate the legs. Once we separate the legs, when she gets to pinch her knees together now, it's a pretty easy thing for me to just scoot and to invert my left knee. Once my left knee is inverted, from here, I want to stop her from back heeling strongly to control the upper part of my leg.

(10:42 - 11:04)
So once my knee is inverted, I just take her own leg, centre chest like so. Once I take her leg centre chest, now from here, I can unlock my legs. The main danger is that from here, she grabs my knee and she pulls it up and now she pulls it back at the 50-50, okay? So I keep my knee inverted.

(11:04 - 11:11)
So from here, I really focus on flaring my left knee out towards the floor. I don't just have it dangling around here. It's just dangling around.

(11:11 - 11:19)
There's no tension, just lifts it. So I put tension on it through it like so. When she goes to lift it, it's not going to be impossible, but it's not going to be easy from here.

(11:20 - 11:29)
And now from here, I lift her leg and I make space. I can unlock my legs from here because my knee is entrapped within her knee line. If she tries to heel hook me from here, it means nothing.

(11:30 - 11:47)
So from here, I can have the confidence to unlock my legs, lift her leg, and just scoot my knee to the inside position. Once my knee's in the inside, now I just shear her leg out and away. I pump my foot to the inside and now we're back to neutral, ready to work, okay? So I separate her ankles.

(11:49 - 12:04)
As we separate her ankles from here, we invert our left knee and bring our left knee to the floor. As our left knee comes down to the floor, we take her leg centre chest. Once her leg comes centre chest from here, now I can have the confidence with tension running through my left leg to unlock my leg.

(12:05 - 12:13)
When she tries to heel hook me or pull me back into 50-50, it's not going to be easy. It's going to take time. And now all I'm looking to do from here, she can back heel all she wants from here.

(12:13 - 12:25)
As she looks to back heel, I can either, one, find the hamstring. If she back heels so strong that I can't lift the leg, we can always find the hamstring. We can just push the legs apart.

(12:26 - 12:40)
If from here, she allows me to lift the leg and the leg stays straight, now it's hard to find the hamstring because the leg's straight. But from here, we just pummel inside and underneath my partner's leg. Now we use that inside knee position to clear our foot and we can pull the foot out.

(12:40 - 12:48)
We play a basic dilemma game. If the leg is straight, there's no back heel. I can always lift and as I lift, we just bring the knee to the inside.

(12:49 - 13:10)
If there's a strong back heel and I try to lift and she won't let me, now there's always a bend in the leg and I can always find the hamstring, push the leg out, bring our feet free, and now we're out. Okay? So extracting the leg by separating their ankles, so we're really on offence, separating their ankles. Instead of going into attacks, we separate the ankles, we take their foot centre chest, then we extract our leg, bringing our two feet to the inside.

(13:14 - 13:36)
Another great option we have from here, this goes into just more counter locking, where we move from a symmetrical position to an asymmetrical position, where I separate the legs from here. I take it centre chest and as we take it centre chest, instead of extracting our leg, we just make a pass. We pass the leg over and we go into outside ashigarami where we can v-grip it from here.

(13:36 - 13:50)
We forward shift. Now we can go and do all of our counter attacks right from outside ashigarami. So not really defensive, but just counter locking from a situation where we're defending, defending, defending, and then we have this balanced mindset between offence and defence.

(13:50 - 14:21)
So we go in 50-50, we separate the legs, we can extract them, but instead we stay in the pocket, transfer to outside ashigarami, where now our legs are relatively safe and hers are pretty exposed. Okay, so this time I'm trying to play a defensive game and extract my legs, but she has a full figure four lock from here. So from here, because she has a full figure four lock, it's going to be hard for me to separate my legs or separate her legs and actually extract my leg.

(14:21 - 14:47)
So we use the threat of a toe hold to either finish my partner or get her to uncross the leg, extract her leg, whatever the case is. So from here, when she has a toe hold, when she has a full figure four in place, we catch a grip down by the long end of the lever of our partner's toes like so. We take our arm and we reach through with the intention of connecting the crease of our elbow to our partner's Achilles, the best we can here.

(14:47 - 15:02)
Now from here, we need that coupled shearing force we talked about in leg locking, where I push the toes down towards the butt. I pull the heel up towards my chin. And from here, we had a strong back heel, our legs and the bridge forward with the hips.

(15:02 - 15:13)
I'm going to get strong finishes with toe holds from 50-50. And obviously I go far more into the mechanics in leg locking than we're going to do here. But those are the basic idea.

(15:13 - 15:26)
It's a basic idea of going for a toe hold. So when I see I'm trying to separate the legs, but she goes into a full figure four and I really can't extract my leg from here, use the threat of a toe hold to get her to loosen or to unlock the legs to be able to extract their legs. Okay.

(15:27 - 15:38)
So I feel from here, she's a full figure four. We go in, we lock up. From here, we reach all the way around and we get elbow deep on our partner's Achilles.

(15:38 - 15:53)
And now from here, toes to butt, heel to chin, strong back heel, knees pinch and a bridge forward. And then you get strong finishes with a toe hold from 50-50. And that forces your partner to either tap, loosen the legs or extract her leg.

(15:58 - 16:04)
This is something that actually happened in one of my recent matches. I had my legs figure forward. I talked about this in the leg locking instructional.

(16:04 - 16:29)
I had my legs figure forward in my match with Nikki Rod because of the fact that he was greased and the figure four allows more wedging in order for you not to lose the legs. The legs doesn't come out anyways, even though you have good wedging in place. So long story short, I had a full figure four in order to wedge him in place a little bit better because he was so slippery and he used a toe hold to threaten my legs.

(16:29 - 16:37)
And then when I unlocked the figure four, he used it to extract his leg. So this is actually exactly what I'm teaching right now. What he did to me is exactly what I'm going to show you.

(16:37 - 16:45)
It does work. So from here, my opponent has a full figure four. She's attacking me.

(16:46 - 16:56)
I want to play defence and I want to extract my leg. They use the threat of a toe hold. If I attack my partner with a toe hold and she stays with a figure four, she's going to get broken from here.

(16:56 - 17:02)
So she has to unlock the figure four. And you can see me lock the figure four in our match too. So she has to unlock the figure four from here.

(17:02 - 17:12)
So when I go for a toe hold, if she stays with the feet locked, she's going to get broke because now she can't roll. So she has to unlock the feet. Once the feet come out, now the toe hold's still on.

(17:13 - 17:38)
In order for her to roll or play a defensive game from here and not get broken, she has to extract the opposite leg, which is controlled by the 50-50. Only now, because there's no ashigurami, can she roll. And because now she has, she has no ashigurami, in our case, looking for defence and extraction, and in Nicky Rod's case, because he didn't want to actually do leg locks and stay in the pocket, he just moved out and away, got up, and now we're back to neutral.

(17:39 - 18:00)
So to use the threat of a toe hold, to put heat on our partner, to force them to open the legs. Now, even with the legs open, if she stays here and her left knee stays trapped, if she tries to defend from here, she's still going to get broken. So what she has to do is she has to straighten that leg, invert the knee, and pull that leg out before she can actually defend.

(18:00 - 18:30)
And as she does that, she just completely disengages the ashigurami. Now that allows me to either extract my leg or if I want to actually stay in the pocket and do jiu-jitsu, I can just go into a full toe hold and outside ashigurami and go into breaks from here or switch off as she goes to start rolling to heel hooks and then go into my wins from outside ashigurami. But the threat of a toe hold will force your partner to open a triangle and free that knee if the toe hold is on.

(18:30 - 18:48)
And then as they extract their leg, you just pull your legs out and now you're back to neutral. And another thing that can happen when you go for a toe hold is instead of your partner just disengaging the legs completely, when they feel a toe hold coming on, they can just go back to a semi-senkaku and cross the ankles. And I talked about this again.

(18:49 - 19:14)
The reason why I didn't do that and go to crossed ankles was because he had so much lotion on him that if I would have crossed my ankles and used anything besides a figure four, the leg would have just slipped out right away. So I elected to stay with the full figure four and I ended up getting toe held and then his leg came out anyways. But I was wedging him in place pretty well with the figure four up until that point.

(19:15 - 19:50)
But the real option, the smart option for your opponent to do here, if they want to stay in 50-50 and actually engage and there's enough friction to actually engage from crossed ankles, it's not to just wait for the toe hold to come on and open the figure four. The second the toe hold comes on, as I go to lock toe hold, she extends her other leg and she crosses her ankles and she goes from a full figure four to crossed ankles. And now from here, she's in 50-50, there's enough wedging in place, assuming there's no grease and she can go in and keep attacking me from here.

(19:51 - 20:00)
The good news for us is when she has a full figure of four, it's hard for us to separate her legs. It's hard for me to come through and get to that heel. So I threaten the toe hold.

(20:00 - 20:43)
As I threaten, she extends and now with those crossed ankles, it's much easier for us to create that space to come through, grab her heel like so, grab the sole of her foot, separate the legs, and now we can start all of our extractions. So we use the threat of a toe hold to either force our partner to unlock the legs completely and force them to extract, or as we go for the toe hold, they make a switch from a full figure four to a semi Senkaku and that semi Senkaku gives you the space to reach through, grab the heel, grab the foot, separate the legs, and then go for your counter locks or your extractions. So now let's look at building up to a knee.

(20:43 - 21:01)
So if we can't use counter locks, we can't just take everything inside and extract our leg. Let's look at building to a knee and look at extracting up from kneeling and standing positions. So first things first, I can't just unlock my legs from here and have my partner look to start to go into attacks.

(21:01 - 21:38)
So the second I unlock my legs, I have to tuck my leg in to this position here, and now I'm going to tuck my foot in underneath me. If at any point I see my partner come forward and start to either elongate my foot like so, or just outright catch my heel, I have to go back in and either can relock my legs and reestablish a connection, or as she goes to lock, I have to come forward and I have to get to my partner's head and elbow and then play a game where I strip the grip like so, like we're going to talk about in a second. All right? But I can't have a scenario.

(21:38 - 21:54)
The main thing is I can't have a scenario where I'm trying to build to a knee, my foot's just dangling out there and I get heel hooked because I'm just trying to get to a knee. All right? So you have to have that understanding that when you're in danger, there's always a You can always build to a knee later. If you get submitted, the match is over.

(21:54 - 22:10)
So I tuck my foot in, I pull my heel in so I can't get elongated, and now from here, I just cup the inside of my partner's knee like so. Now I lean my head to one side and I just rock my way up. We put weight over our partner's knee like so.

(22:10 - 22:23)
Now from here, or over our foot like so. Now from here, she'll have her hips up high, so we have 50-50 locked, and now we're in a situation where I'm on top of my partner. I have a knee up, my foot's down, there's no immediate danger.

(22:23 - 22:45)
And from here, we can go in and start to play a game where we either separate our partner's feet or we go in and stand up and start to extract our legs. A lot of times when you come to your knee, they'll unlock their legs and they'll start feeding in for back takes. So we have two good options as far as this goes.

(22:45 - 22:55)
One is when your partner doesn't have an Achilles. The other one is when they have an Achilles. So from here, we're in position.

(22:55 - 23:10)
The leg comes out and feeds to my far hip like so. If my partner doesn't have an Achilles grip and she just is here and she's just reaching for my far leg, there's no reason why I can't just strip this grip. If it's low like this, I can just push it off.

(23:11 - 23:22)
A lot of times her hips are high. It makes it difficult for me to step this leg out. But the control of the hip doesn't really mean that you can't lift your leg from here.

(23:23 - 23:41)
So right from here, if I feel that my leg can just come out, a lot of times I can just step my leg and just high leg and just step out like so. If for whatever reason, let's say you're so small and you have a big guy. And from here, the weight is just so heavy on you that you can't step your leg up.

(23:41 - 23:52)
You can just come in and you can scoop your partner's leg like so. Now you can alleviate the pressure by just opening up your elbow and just step your leg out. That's if there's no Achilles.

(23:52 - 24:01)
Now, most people are always going to lock an Achilles. Whenever I see this, she locks an Achilles grip on me like so. And now from here, she goes to take my back.

(24:02 - 24:14)
Now I can't just step my leg out. So she has some control over my leg. Whenever I see this, she wants to invert her knee and bring it inside like so and get to my second leg with her opposite hand.

(24:14 - 24:26)
So the second I see this, immediately, we're going to go and we're going to control two ankles. Right from here, I lean my weight onto my right foot. So as she goes to reach for my left leg, I step it up and far away from my partner.

(24:26 - 24:37)
Now I control both my partner's ankles because I can't step forward with this leg unless I control that angle. So I stuff both the ankles. I take a big step around the corner.

(24:37 - 24:47)
And I'm going to extract our legs. We're going to do neutral passing positions or attacks right in the pocket of passing our partner's guard. So we go in.

(24:48 - 24:53)
She has no Achilles. We just high step out. She has an Achilles and she locks up from here.

(24:53 - 24:59)
We go in. The first thing we do, we just control two ankles. Now I can't have her inverting the knee and getting to my second leg.

(24:59 - 25:15)
So right from here, the second we control two ankles, we just lean our weight onto our right foot and we go almost into a sprint out in this direction. The second she goes to start controlling me, we just step right up. Now we're ready to start passing and extracting our legs.

(25:16 - 25:37)
So we're in the lines of guard passing, but you should be able to extract the leg effectively and efficiently when someone puts you up, when you get up to your knee and your partner's trying to leg lock you and playing a combination of leg lock, back take, leg lock, back take. So now we're on a knee. We're going to build to a standing position.

(25:37 - 25:53)
How do we do this? Without getting knocked over or having a partner invert on us like so, or underneath us in between our legs. From here, as we go to stand up, we're going to have a post hand out on the floor. So my partner goes to knock me down.

(25:53 - 26:00)
It's difficult. I lean all my weight to one side. Again, if my shoulders are over my hips, she off balances me and knocks me over in this direction.

(26:01 - 26:13)
So from here, I have a post hand. I make it hard for my partner to knock me in this direction because my weight is leaning to the opposite side. Now, the second thing that I have to worry about is her inverting underneath me.

(26:13 - 26:27)
So if I posture, she knocks me over backwards. If I lean forward and I come towards her, she can invert underneath me and start to expose my leg. So from here, we just take a V grip here on our partner's throat.

(26:27 - 26:37)
So when she has to move her head between my legs, which is what she needs for an inversion, she needs her head to come between my legs. She can't do it. If I take a V grip here and now she goes to knock me backwards, she can't.

(26:38 - 26:58)
When she goes to invert, she can't. And now from here, we just use active toes to lean our weight forward and just pop right up to a standing position like so. And now, whenever my partner goes to invert between my legs, we can just use a thumb post on our partner's throat like so, make it hard for her to start inverting between my legs, making it harder for her to knock me down backwards.

(26:58 - 27:17)
And now we can start separating legs, extracting our legs from there. All right, so just some ways to extract our legs from here. Obviously, this is more along the lines of guard passing, but we should be able to extract our legs and be safe in these positions.

(27:20 - 27:47)
The main danger from here is if my partner sits me down backwards, my legs are unlocked and as I fall, I get heel hook. Or my partner inverts underneath me and from here, she does the backside 50-50 and I get heel hook. So we have to make sure when we're standing, we stop the inversion with the throat post and we stop getting knocked backwards and never being completely shoulders over hips for any amount of time.

(27:47 - 28:00)
So from here, a couple of good options. Number one, if she unlocks her legs and tries to take my back, we intercept the ankle, we post the other ankle, then we just step forward and pivot as we just did. Okay, so that's a good option.

(28:01 - 28:19)
Number two from here, from this scenario, we can keep our head bent over like so. We can use the same grip break that we did when we're down on the floor seated. We can reach through, we can catch.

(28:19 - 28:30)
Again, when she goes to knock me backwards, my head is leaned to one side. I can't stay here forever because you can invert from here. So I always go in, I play here, I step my leg far back and away.

(28:31 - 28:41)
Now I quickly go in, one, two, I separate. Once I separate, my hips come forward. When she goes to knock me backwards, her legs are open.

(28:41 - 28:49)
It's hard. I stuff the leg between mine and now we can step forward and pivot and separate. So that's a good option as well.

(28:51 - 29:15)
So if I feel I want to separate her legs and she doesn't want to separate them, we just go through, one, two, separate, hips come forward, I stuff and I step. And finally, from here, if I can't do any of that, then from here, we just catch our partner's legs. Now, any kind of grip kind of works from here because your hands are just guiding the legs, your hips are doing the work.

(29:16 - 29:28)
My hips just thrust forward, I just pass the legs across. I can grab here, I can grab the heel, doesn't really matter. Once the hips come forward, the legs are presented.

(29:29 - 29:43)
And then any grip pushes them across. Then we just go to that knee down escape where we just drop our knee down to the floor. And now from here, we can split our partner's legs and we can go in and start working to get our leg free.

(29:44 - 30:04)
So extracting the leg once we move to a standing position from 50-50. All right, so now we're going to look at a situation where my partner gets a hold of my heel, but doesn't have the extensions she needs yet to actually finish me. From 50-50, she's looking to create extension, I'm looking to create contraction.

(30:04 - 30:22)
So if she grabs a hold of my heel and she locks up from here, what she needs is to extend belly down so I can't get to her head and elbow. So the first thing I'm going to do, she's in here, she goes to start breaking me, I'm going to pull my heel to my butt the best I can to pull her toward me. Now I want a heel slip.

(30:23 - 30:29)
From here, I'm going to come forward and I'm going to get to my partner's head. Sometimes you can't reach the elbow right away. Maybe she's a little bit further away.

(30:30 - 30:38)
I can't get to the elbow right away. So I go to the head with my right hand. You can even go to the head with two hands if you have to initially and pull your partner in.

(30:39 - 30:51)
But ultimately what I want is I want one hand, the top hand on the head, and then I want the bottom hand on the breaking elbow. Okay, so her right hand has a grip on my heel, that's what ultimately going to break me. I want the right elbow.

(30:52 - 31:21)
From here, as she goes to start breaking me, I pull my heel to my butt, I pull my partner's head and elbow towards me, and then from there I connect my elbow to my partner's, uh, to my partner's, uh, crease of my partner's elbow here. Now, once I pull my partner in and I back heel, I change my back heel to a pointing and extension of my leg and I point my heel out in the opposite direction. And now from here, I pull my partner towards me.

(31:21 - 31:30)
I relock my legs so we can initially slip our partner's grip. When she initially catches, there's no extension yet. So she goes in, she separates my legs, however it may be, and she locks up.

(31:31 - 31:38)
If I can get to the elbow right away, I get to the head and the elbow. If I can't, I get to the head. If I have to, I use two hands on the head.

(31:38 - 31:45)
And now from here, I pull my partner into me, I give a strong back heel. This exposes the elbow. The far elbow is what I need.

(31:45 - 31:53)
When she goes to extend now, it's not going to be easy. From here, I have my partner close to me. Now, I pull the elbow towards me.

(31:53 - 32:13)
I pull the head towards me and I connect my heel to my partner's elbow. Now, as I pull her upper body towards me, I extend my leg and I turn my heel in like so to slip the grip and I just go in, relock my legs. Now, we're back into a relatively safe position where we can go into all of our counter offence or extractions.

(32:14 - 32:23)
All right. So now let's look at more of a crisis. My partner actually gets the grip on the heel.

(32:24 - 32:32)
She actually gets a grip on the heel. She extends my leg and I'm like, oh man, this is no good. The heel slip from here is going to be the same as it was from cross Ashi.

(32:33 - 32:57)
My whole thing is I want to push my heel in towards my partner. I want to take my hips up and off the floor slightly and I want to point my toes and I want to turn my heel into the lock and then point my heel at my partner's rib cage and heel slip through. And once again, we go through and from here we come in and we get control over our partner's arm if we have to.

(32:57 - 33:08)
If I try to heel slip and I try to go into the lock, she pulls everything up and from here I try to go into the lock and I feel like I can't do it. I can come forward. I can pull my partner's hands down a few times and then I can go into my heel slip.

(33:08 - 33:18)
Okay. So if my leg is extended and I try to heel slip, this heel slipping mechanics are the same as they were from a cross Ashi scenario. Okay.

(33:18 - 33:30)
Either heel slip or I pull the hands down and then I heel slip. Okay. Now you can combine these two heel slipping methods where from here she goes to put a grip on before this extension.

(33:31 - 33:41)
We get to the head, we get to the elbow, you pull everything through and we try to heel slip. This time she tries to, she goes to extend. I try to heel slip, but I feel like it's too tight.

(33:41 - 33:49)
All right. Now, when I feel like it's too tight, her knee is on the floor, so I can't come forward and get to her head and shoulders. It's too much extension.

(33:50 - 34:13)
So from here I try to heel slip first, I grab my partner's knee, I grab my partner's second knee, and then right from here I bring my foot in. Now I pull my partner's knees across and once I pull the knees across, I switch from a pulling grip to a pushing grip. Now I put my hand on the floor, I scoot around the corner, and now I can cover my partner's knee with my rib cage.

(34:14 - 34:22)
And now when she goes to reinvert the knee, she can't do it. I can get to the elbow, I can get to the head, and now we can heel slip once again. So initially she goes to lock up.

(34:24 - 34:33)
From here I go in, I slip. This time she extends, I go forwards, I slip. This time I try to slip.

(34:33 - 34:55)
It fails. From here I open up the knees, I scoot around the corner, I get to the head and the elbow, I slip, and now we're out and we're back into neutral 50-50 with our legs locked. So now the heel slipping is not going to happen.

(34:55 - 35:01)
Getting to the head and elbow is not going to happen. I can't even scoot around the corner and I can't get to my partner's head. I can't heel slip.

(35:02 - 35:17)
And again, this is relatively low percentage, but you can do it. Like I said, you can't do it. But you can start high-legging over, and from there as you go to high-leg over, you can try to create motion towards an escape.

(35:17 - 35:31)
So from here I feel like I'm just not going to be able to do any of the previous moves. Right from here, we go through, we just get a high leg up and over like so. Now I can't land in backside 50-50 where now she can put more body weight on me and make it easier to break.

(35:31 - 35:43)
So I go into a belly down position and then I use that momentum to carry me through into a belly up position like so. Or now hopefully I can pull my legs in. I can scoot around the corner.

(35:44 - 35:51)
I can get to the head and elbow or the hands are a little bit lower. I can heel slip and I can make something happen. So I can create motion towards an escape.

(35:51 - 35:58)
Understand you're getting broken the whole way through. That's why it's dangerous. But you can create motion towards an escape, especially if you're willing to take a pop.

(35:58 - 36:05)
Create motion towards an escape. Try to loosen the ashigurami. Try to have the hands fall down a little bit and then try to work towards an escape on the other side.

(36:05 - 36:11)
But it is difficult. So from here, she goes to break me. Heel slip's not happening.

(36:11 - 36:14)
I can't get to the head. I can't get to the elbow. Just none of it's working.

(36:14 - 36:26)
So from here, we roll all the way through a full rotation. And now from here, we try to get to the head and shoulders. Or from here, we land and now the hands are a little bit lower and now we heel slip.

(36:26 - 36:34)
And then from here, we're going to try to work to an escape. Understand the whole rotation through, she's going to be trying to break you. And she's going to be breaking if she has the mechanics.

(36:35 - 36:45)
So it is risky, but it can work. It can create motion towards an escape and get you out in a crisis scenario. All right.

(36:45 - 36:57)
So now we're going to look to run our second leg into an interference. Provided we heel slip things harder. Maybe we're having an issue getting to the head and the elbow.

(36:57 - 37:04)
We feel like it's hard to just heel slip right. Just with our one leg. And it's hard to get to the head and elbow.

(37:04 - 37:24)
And you feel like it's going to be almost impossible to roll a full rotation without getting broken. So what we can do from here is either early, like preemptively when my partner's here. If I feel like I'm going to lose the head and the elbow, as she goes to extend, we just take our foot and we just place it on the inside of our partner's elbow here.

(37:24 - 37:47)
And so now as she goes to go belly down and start extending, we can go in and we can separate our partner's heels like so, or our partner's hands like so. And then if she goes into a full belly down position, she inverts the knee like so we can still go in and we can lean out to the side. We can take our second leg in and we can just touch our partner's wrist like so.

(37:48 - 38:02)
And now from here, as she goes to start moving me around, I can flare my right foot. I can point the heel and we can use the assistance of the second foot to interfere with my partner's grips. And we feel like we can't get to the head and the elbow.

(38:02 - 38:11)
And we feel like we can't go into a heel slip just with my leg. So from here, we can do it as she's going back. Right from here, we just go in and we touch.

(38:12 - 38:23)
Now she goes to break me. The legs are already in there. Or more realistically, when I feel like we're in a situation like so, getting to the head and the elbow is impossible.

(38:24 - 38:37)
Heel slipping with one leg isn't going to work. And so from here, we just stick our second leg in. So now when she goes to break me, I have two legs assisting with the heel slip instead of one when the rotation is super dangerous and very risky.

(38:38 - 38:49)
The head and the elbow aren't there. The heel slip is not there, but a second assistant leg of trying to help me heel slip may do the job. I can use my second leg to run interference provided I can't get to my partner's head.

(38:49 - 39:54)
I can't get to the elbow and I can't heel slip. All right, so we have some pretty clear end games here. If we feel like our partner goes into a belly down position and is going to start breaking me and I can't heel slip, I can't interfere with the second foot, I can't scoot around the corner and get to the head and the elbow, and then I can't go into a full rotation without loosening the lock to some degree, she's going to apply the mechanics and she's going to break me, okay? When we're in this position, if I can't get to the head and the elbow in time and she goes belly down from here and I can't interfere with the second foot and I can't go into a full rotation, she's going to break me, okay? This is one of those situations where if she does go belly up and she tries to break me in this position, understand that with the other ashiguramis, it's not really realistic unless the few examples that I gave, but in general, it's not really realistic to come forward and try to pull the hands down.

(39:54 - 40:31)
But if she's belly up in this position, I can always scoot around the knee, I can get to that head and I can get to that elbow, and from here, we can go in and we can escape. So it's realistic from 50-50 when she's belly up to actually pull the hands down, but in most of the other ashiguramis, it's not because of the extension of the body, the wedging across the hips, and the fact that my hands are so high and so far away that you can't get to the hands. But the one inherent disadvantage of 50-50 is that it's usually pretty easy to get to the head and get to the elbow and separate the lock that way, whereas in other ashiguramis, it's not really realistic to do reliably time and time again.

(40:31 - 41:08)
But if your partner is belly up from here, I can always scoot around the corner, I can get to the head and get to the elbow, and I can separate. So most of her finishes, most finishes on good people from here will always be in a belly down position here, where now I can't get to the head, I can't get to the elbow, I can't interfere with the second leg, and from here, if I try to roll through, I'm getting broken, I'm getting broken, I'm getting broken, I'm getting broken, I'm getting broken badly, I'm getting broken badly, and now I have a chance to escape, which most people have already tapped by then. So just keep in mind, these are some of the things you have to think about when you're working through the submissions, through the defence, the early escapes, the late escapes, and eventually into the endgame.

(41:13 - 42:17)
So this time, we're going to be in backside 50-50, where your partner, you have 50-50, we roll into this inverted position, and we're in backside 50-50 from here, all right? From here, just take the lock off. From here, if my partner initially has this position, and I feel that this is a sensitivity thing too, sometimes you feel like, oh, maybe I can free my knee, sometimes you feel like, oh, my leg's about to break, it takes time being here. If you can hide your heel well enough, where your partner goes to start exposing the heel, if I step the leg up, if I can push my partner's ankle down and pull my partner's heel and ankle up, from here, as she goes to expose my heel, I can slip my knee free, I can separate the legs, and now I can work on moving out and away and escaping from here, okay? So if my leg, if I have time from here, maybe my partner's going to dig, and as she's going to dig, I already have grips in the legs, but as she goes to dig for my heel, I can separate and free my knee, now you can go into escapes.

(42:18 - 42:37)
If from here, she locks the legs, she has a strong back heel, you have a hard time separating her legs, and she has a strong bite on your leg, you don't have the time, it's a time-based thing. If I have the time to separate the legs and break my knee free, I will. If I don't, she's going to be trying to finish me, going belly down in this direction.

(42:37 - 43:25)
So from here, if I don't have the time, and she goes to start breaking me, I have to go into an inversion, like so, and then if she goes crossways, we'll deal with this in a second, she goes back into regular 50-50, I have to, again, try to use second leg interference, I have to try to heel slip, or I have to try to come forward and get to the head and the elbow. So you have two options, one is when she doesn't have the heel, or she's just digging for it, and you're not going to get broken, you can separate the legs and use the knee down method, the down knee method, to go down and out and away, or if you're going to get broken, you have to go into a full rotation, back belly up, hopefully, and then use one of the previous methods to go into a slip and hopefully escape. So this time, we go to backside 50-50, partner rolls through, we end up in crisscross Ashi, this is no good.

(43:26 - 44:10)
And again, a lot of times you're getting broken this whole time, I'm just giving you options as to how you can quickly react to go into escape, but these are all pretty much end game positions, and I'm not going to do end games for each one of them, but just know that if you can't make these transitions with the legs, if you can't go from crisscross Ashi and go back to 50-50, that's your end game, you're going to get finished from there. So from here, we're in 50-50, we go in, we end up in backside 50, from here, this time, whether she has a heel hook or not, she probably will from here because it's pretty easy to expose, I go into a full roll, and as I go into a roll, she transitions to crisscross Ashi. All right, so from here, I'm getting broken the whole time.

(44:10 - 44:30)
Now, from here, I can't scoot around the corner from here because she has too much wedging between myself and her. So what I need to do from here, and again, you're getting broken this whole time, so it's tough to deal with. And if you can't do this, you can't make this transition, and you can't heel slip, you're pretty much on an end game from here.

(44:30 - 44:43)
All right, so the first thing I try to do is heel slip. If I can heel slip, great, but the lock is probably so tight already that you're not gonna be able to heel slip. So assuming I can't heel slip, I have to, from here, angle my body out in this direction, I'm trying to heel slip.

(44:43 - 44:56)
From here, I take my hand and I grab her heel. As she goes to start back heeling, I start lifting, and I thrust my hips forward, and I make a pass off to 50-50. Now, I'm continuing to try and heel slip.

(44:57 - 45:16)
If I can heel slip, great. If I can't, now I have to either one, roll again, or I have to try to scoot the corner, get to the head of the elbow, and do the previous escapes. But we're in 50-50, and I have to try to escape, but you've been being broken for three seconds already, and it's kind of hard, but this is what your options are.

(45:16 - 45:24)
So we land in a crisscross ashi from backside 50. From here, I grab my partner's foot like so. Now, it's not the hand.

(45:24 - 45:43)
As she back heels and puts her foot down, it's not the hand doing the work. It's my hips coming forwards that brings their foot forward, and then my hand just guides everything across and feeds me back to 50-50, and now I can start my escapes. And if you can't do that, if you can't take the leg over 50-50 before you get broken, that's your end game.

(45:47 - 46:08)
All right, so another scenario is we're in backside 50-50, and we're in here. She has to put a heel hook on. From here, we go to roll through, and this time, instead of going between my legs, she takes her foot, and she goes across into a far waist position like so.

(46:08 - 46:12)
Now, I can't come forward. I probably can't heel slip. If I can heel slip, then I can do that.

(46:13 - 46:22)
I probably can't heel slip. I can't come forward and get in, and from here, I can't even go into a roll now because she's controlling my left hip. If I try to roll, I can't because of the back heel.

(46:23 - 46:31)
So from here, I have to lay back, and again, you're getting broken the whole time. I have to take the time to lean back. I have to pass the foot across to 50-50.

(46:32 - 46:52)
I have to sit up, and then from here, I have to come forward and try to get to the head and the hands or heel slip or go into another rotation, okay? And if you can't pass the leg across in the time allowed, which is not that much time that you have, that's the end game, all right? So from here, she lands in cross waist. I fall back. I pass the leg across.

(46:52 - 47:09)
I sit up, and now from here, I start trying to play my game or I scoot around the corner, and I can get to the head, get to the elbow, and slip, and I'm out and away, okay? So it's going to be happening fast. If she goes 50-50, we go backside 50-50. She exposes my heel.

(47:09 - 47:25)
As I get a roll through, she goes cross waist. And from here, we can get to the head, get to the elbow, and try to work from there. So this time, we're in 50-50.

(47:25 - 47:36)
We're up on the knees. My partner puts a heel hook on. This time, when my partner's on the knees and she puts a heel hook on, you're in luck because you're in 50-50.

(47:37 - 47:42)
You can get to the head pretty easy from here. So from here, she goes to start breaking you. I just lean forward.

(47:42 - 47:50)
I get to the head. I get to the elbow, and when she has to break me from here, I just pull everything in. I slip the heel, and now from here, I just plant my foot, and we're out and away.

(47:51 - 48:06)
So it's actually pretty easy to defend when someone has a heel hook from 50-50, and you build up to a knee from here. The problem is, if I'm sitting on my butt, and she has to start breaking me, even if she goes belly down, if she's belly up, then I just get to the hands. She has to go belly down.

(48:06 - 48:17)
If I try to come up to my knees from here, as I come up to my knees, she's already extending that way, and I'm getting broken belly down. So you don't have time to build to a knee and to pick the back belly up. It's more of, I'm up on my knee already.

(48:17 - 48:34)
She feeds into a heel hook from here, and as she does, I get to the head. I get to the elbow, and then from here, I separate, and I plant my foot, and I go into my escapes off of there. So now we're standing in 50-50.

(48:35 - 48:54)
I partner however it may be, exposes my heel, and she goes in, and from here, she locks her hands. Now, when I'm standing, it's going to be hard for me to reach down and to get to my partner's head and elbow reliably. So the second I see this, she goes to start breaking me, I just put my hands on the floor.

(48:55 - 49:07)
I drop down to a knee, and my hand immediately comes head, elbow, strip, and I'm out. So the second I'm standing, I see her put a heel hook on. I don't do anything besides drop to my knees.

(49:08 - 49:26)
The second she goes to start breaking me, I immediately just drop to a knee. I get to the head, I get to the elbow, I strip the grip, and we're out, and we're safe. All right, so before we move to Michiwa Ashi, I'm just going to do a little bit of recapping on 50-50.

(49:26 - 49:48)
You see there's a lot of different leg configurations. When you're initially in 50-50, there's a lot of different Ashi grommies that branch off of 50-50. We have press cross Ashi, we have backside 50-50, we have cross waist, we have all these different leg configurations that make it more difficult to defend, and you have to know exactly what reactions to give depending on where your partner's legs are relative to your body relative to the position.

(49:49 - 50:15)
And so this takes, you're under a lot of stress, a lot of times the heel hook is in place, and this is why I said you have to remain calm under fire, okay? When you're in 50-50, it's the perfect balance of a defensive and an offensive mindset. You can't be overly offensive and leave your legs out there and just get counterlocked every time. You can't be overly defensive and just be in a defensive cycle, your partner's just relentlessly attacking you because they have no respect for your attacks.

(50:15 - 50:50)
You're not putting any positional pressure, and you're not giving them any submission danger to worry about their own legs. You have to be both offensive and defensive focused when you're playing in 50-50, and you have to be able to understand the nuances and the different positions within 50-50, and the Ashi grommies that branch off of 50-50, and know how to both attack and defend properly from each of those given positions. All right, last but not least, Michiwashi.

(50:51 - 50:55)
Michiwashi is like the 50-50 of outside heel hooks. Hey, excited. We're almost done.

(50:57 - 51:07)
It's 3.30 in the morning, by the way. So yeah, we're almost done here. So anyways, Michiwashi is the 50-50 of outside heel hooks.

(51:08 - 51:22)
And again, number one, from a Michiwashi, there's no building to a knee, building to standing position because both hips are controlled and the legs are on the outside. Unlike 50-50, you can't just build to a knee. You can't build to a standing position.

(51:22 - 51:38)
Everything will be done from a seated position. Okay, that's the first thing. Number two, because you're both in a situation with symmetrical leg positions, and you can both attack each other relatively equally, you can't be in a mindset of just attack, attack, attack, or defend, defend, defend.

(51:38 - 51:48)
The same as 50-50. You have to have a balance between I'm attacking this guy and I'm defending. If you're overzealous on attacking, that means you're going to leave your own leg exposed.

(51:48 - 52:10)
You're going to get counter-locked. But if you just defend, defend, defend, then your partner doesn't respect you and they just attack, attack, attack until they eventually break through and get to a positional gain or a submission. So we're going to move into Michiwashi now using our own attacks to extract our leg, forcing our partner to extract their leg, or passing into other Ashiguramis where we can go into attacks or extract our leg in other fashions.

(52:14 - 52:38)
All right, so let's look at just some basic theory from Michiwashi. She has an outside heel hook, I have an outside heel hook, and from here, we're ready to start going into attacks on our partner. From this position, if she goes to expose my heel and she goes belly down, she tries to dig for my heel, she will expose her own heel, and from here, I can go into attacks and I can start putting heat on her.

(52:38 - 53:05)
So be careful about going first here. If we start in this position here and we say go, if I say, oh man, I want to expose the heel, so I'm going to start going belly down and I'm going to start exposing her heel, I expose my own heel, and now from here, I'm in trouble. Her heel is safe, my heel is exposed, and I'm losing this shootout from here, okay? And just be cognisant of being so excited to dig for your partner's heel, going belly down, and as you go belly down, you expose your own heel.

(53:05 - 53:28)
So I'm not going to say that the first person to get a grip on the heel is going to lose, but if you fall belly down to try to expose your partner's heel and you go first, it is possible that you're losing this battle from here. All right, so now let's look at just using the inside knee position to extract our leg. So from here, we have mutual Ashi, he's trying to expose my heel.

(53:29 - 53:58)
From this position, we're just going to go in and we're just going to take an inside elbow position relative to our partner's knee. We can also take a V-grip at the end of our partner's ankle like so, but from here, we can start to open our partner's ankle up. So whether we open the ankle, we hide our heel like so, whether from here we open the ankle and bring our knee to the inside and scoot away, or from here, she goes to start exposing me, we use an inside elbow position to open up our partner's knee, and from here, we take our knees together.

(53:58 - 54:23)
When she goes to lock in everything tight, I use a strong back heel from here. It's a pretty easy thing at the long end of the lever to start going in and separating and bring your partner's legs open and out of the way and bring your knee to the inside. When she uses a strong back heel from here and a strong knee pinch, it's a pretty easy thing to just grab the inside of our own thigh like so, and then just to shear our legs into a situation where our knees can come together.

(54:23 - 54:36)
Once our knees are together and she goes to start attacking me, she puts a heel hook on, doesn't mean anything. There's no action around me anymore. And now from here, it's a pretty easy thing for me to come through and then start just shearing my legs and moving my leg out and away.

(54:36 - 54:42)
If I have to, I can go across. I can start posting my partner's hamstring. I can extract my legs and we're back to neutral.

(54:42 - 54:52)
We play a game where from here, we're in Michiwashi. We can go in. We can grab the ankle.

(54:53 - 54:59)
We can grab the foot. When she goes to take that strong back heel, she goes to pinch that knee from here. From here, it's a pretty easy thing.

(54:59 - 55:11)
If she resists so hard, she'll actually hurt her own knee because she has to at some point open the knee and now my knee comes to the inside. Or from here, we just take the inside elbow position like so. We just touch her own leg.

(55:11 - 55:19)
And she has to start controlling. Even if she puts her foot on my hip, it doesn't mean anything. Just from here, we just open that elbow up.

(55:19 - 55:27)
And now as we open the elbow, we just wedge it in place. The knee comes in and our knees touch together like so. And once we're here, we're more or less free.

(55:29 - 55:39)
Right from here, we go and we hide our heel. As we hide our heel, again, when we're hiding our heel from here, it's the same thing as outside Ashi Guram. We just tuck our heel in towards our partner's hip.

(55:39 - 55:51)
Same idea with outside heel hooks. Right from here, we just go in and we catch. When she goes to go in and back heel and hit your knee strong, pretty easy thing to open up that leg.

(55:51 - 56:10)
And now from here, we're in, ready to go. Once our knees are connected, it's a pretty easy thing to separate the legs, use the inside knee position, and extract our leg. One of the things we can do is we can threaten a toe hold or we can threaten a heel hook to elicit a defensive reaction from my partner.

(56:10 - 56:19)
So whether we go toe hold, whether we go heel hook, doesn't matter. And as my partner goes to start rolling, she goes into a defensive roll. And from here, as she goes into a defensive roll, I can just let her go.

(56:20 - 56:33)
And as she goes to roll through, if she tries to escape, I just let her escape. And from here, we just get up and we get back into neutral and we can extract our leg. Now, obviously, if we want to stay in the pocket, we just go for an outside heel hook and we just finish our partner.

(56:35 - 57:08)
But if you're dealing with an exceptional leg locker and you're not confident in your ability to leg lock, and you don't want to have the chance of her reentering, instead of going in for a roll, we roll through, we go to outside ashigurami, I put heat on her, and now as she goes to roll, she goes to pull her leg for me, I just let her leg out. And now from here, we just get up, we're back in neutral and we start playing from guard and passing positions when we're ready to go. So we give the threat of going in for a toe hold or a heel hook will force my partner into a defensive roll, and that defensive roll will allow us to just pull our legs out and get back to neutral.

(57:13 - 57:24)
All right, so now my partner actually puts a toe hold or a heel hook on. The defences are going to be relatively pretty much the same because you're going to have to either roll or separate your partner's legs. It depends on what your partner does for their leg configuration.

(57:25 - 57:43)
So when she goes in and she puts a heel hook on, her michi wa, she's always going to, whether it's a heel hook, whether it's a toe hold, doesn't matter. She's always going to be trying to take this leg across and reinforce me into a defensive roll. So the first thing I want is I want to get into a relatively athletic position.

(57:43 - 57:52)
I feel like I'm not going to be able to attack my partner from here. Then I have to start taking my legs and pulling you into this position here. Now my partner can do a couple of things.

(57:53 - 58:26)
She can stay with a relatively orimi ashigurami-like situation where her legs are open. Where from here, now we can go into all of our initial orimi ashigurami defences where I can take the leg through, I can bring the knee back to the inside, and we can start going and separating our partner's legs and bringing our legs to the inside. So if she stays with her legs like so, now from here, we can just start separating the legs or we can go into the full roll and we can move back to the same situation we looked at in the beginning of the instructional defending orimi ashigurami heel hooks and toe holds.

(58:27 - 58:54)
If my partner locks her legs like so, now it's going to be more difficult to go and pass the leg across and separate the legs. So now I have a choice of either trying to roll and using the knee drop method where I take my knee down and out and away. I can go into a full roll, I can go into multiple rolls, or from here, I can look past my partner across into outside ashi, and now I can start to try to heel slip and go back into my partner like so.

(58:55 - 59:31)
If she actually crosses her feet over my far hip like so, I have the option of either trying to pass the outside ashi, I have the option of trying to bring my knee out and away, I have the option of going into full rolls, we can go and divert back to everything we've done so far. If my partner, right from the beginning, we're in michi wa ashi, and right from here, I try to peel my partner's foot and she takes her leg and flips it over to outside ashi gurami, now we have to go into all of our outside ashi gurami defences. What you do from here will be contingent upon what your partner does offensively with her leg position.

(59:31 - 1:00:01)
And whatever she does with her leg position, I just divert back to whatever we looked at in the previous moves, the previous sections of this instructional to go into our defences. Whether it's a full reap, whether it's more rimi ashi gurami, whether it's far hip ashi, whether it's outside ashi, depending on what your partner does will determine how you move defensively to escape this position or eventually run into your end games. All right guys, so we're finally finished.

(1:00:02 - 1:00:16)
About six hours of technique and then probably about another hour and a half to two hours of rolling breakdowns, I think. So at least an hour of rolling breakdowns footage. So we have between seven and eight hours of content here for leg lock defence.

(1:00:16 - 1:00:32)
I think it was pretty good. And we worked through the same kind of format as we did from leg lock offence, and we kind of brought it into leg lock defence. So we went through all the different positions, all different scenarios, and hopefully I didn't forget anything.

(1:00:33 - 1:00:38)
But hopefully you guys enjoyed this. I rushed and did it in two days. We've been filming.

(1:00:38 - 1:00:47)
We filmed. We actually did this one in two days. It usually takes a lot longer, mostly because Michael Zenga is with us in Boston, and he just comes in and talks to us about nothing all day.

(1:00:48 - 1:00:58)
Or John's there with us, and we're watching Rambo scenes on the computer with Randy. So now it's 3.30 in the morning. Nobody's awake to text me.

(1:00:58 - 1:01:14)
No one's here to interrupt, and it's just us three, just us and the cameraman Ty over here who flew in generously to help us out. And so yeah, hopefully you guys enjoyed it. This is big.

(1:01:14 - 1:01:19)
I know that everyone's been looking for leg lock and leg lock defence for years. So hopefully you guys enjoyed this. Hopefully it helps.

(1:01:20 - 1:01:31)
And next we'll be doing guard passing off leg lock. So I'm in offensive positions attacking leg locks. How can I pass guard? I'm in defensive positions.

(1:01:31 - 1:01:38)
How can I pass guard? And then back take same thing. My partner's attacking me. How can I take their back? And I'm attacking my partner.

(1:01:38 - 1:01:43)
How can I take their back off of my offence? So those will be good. Thank you to Fanatics again. Thank you to the fans.

(1:01:43 - 1:01:51)
Thank you to Miss Sunny here for working. What was it? We started at seven and ended at two yesterday. That was five, seven hours.

(1:01:52 - 1:02:01)
And then today we started at eight, ended at four. So that's what? Eight hours of filming. So solid 15 hours of filming.

(1:02:02 - 1:02:11)
It usually takes like 40 hours with Zanga around, but it took 15 this time. So it's actually like might be a record. But yeah, hopefully you guys enjoyed it.

(1:02:11 - 1:02:13)
And I'll see you around. Let me know what you guys think about this one.