(0:13 - 0:43)
Okay, so now we're going to go to inside ashi gurami, and we talked about the inside ashi from the perspective of the attacker when we did the leg locks, now we're going to talk about inside ashi from the perspective of the defensive person. When I'm in inside ashi, this is a hypercritical situation because of the fact that your partner's legs are in the position they are, and they have an outside heel hook, it is impossible for you to hide your heel. All right? If you have someone who's moderately good, your heel is exposed every single time.

(0:43 - 1:09)
So when she has inside ashi, and she feeds my leg to an outside heel hook position, she feeds her leg to the inside, if I try to turn back towards you guys because of her leg position, and I try to hide my heel and I just float back in this direction, I'm just going to break my own leg, even if there's no heel. So when she goes to point her knees in this direction, I have to basically go with it. And so when I try to hide my heel from here, that's the most I can do it.

(1:09 - 1:28)
So when she goes to expose it, it's always exposed. So in this position, you are in a critical situation where you are moments away from having your heel exposed and being broken. Okay? So when you get to this inside ashi position, it's very important that you address your partner's leg position very, very quickly because you know that you can't hide your heel from here.

(1:28 - 1:51)
And her knowing that you can't hide your heel from here, it's confidence inspiring for her and it's very terrifying for you as a defensive person. You have to stay calm, but you have to realise that your heel's going to be exposed and from here you have to address your partner's leg position or get ready to roll right away the second your partner feeds into that inside ashi position. Okay.

(1:51 - 2:06)
So once again, just had a lot of food. So this is the second day filming, by the way, and we started, uh, outside ashi karami. I showed up with the full belly, but it wasn't as bad and now I just eat a lot of food.

(2:06 - 2:11)
So I'm basically just like a fat guy. This whole instructional. So just, I can actually eat food now.

(2:11 - 2:14)
So just be happy for me. Don't, don't fat shame me. Okay.

(2:14 - 2:21)
If my belly's out, my belly's out. I don't know what to do. I can't, I can't hold it.

(2:22 - 2:30)
Just let me be. It's, uh, one 30 in the morning and I'm just a fat guy, happy eating food. So just be proud.

(2:30 - 2:34)
I'd be happy. I can finally eat. It's going to go to my biceps eventually.

(2:36 - 3:00)
So let's talk about inside ashi karami, hiding the heel the best we can. Now your heel's always going to be exposed, but you can't just give up, give your partner a freebie and just have, okay, here's my heel. I should be actively turning the best I can so that my toes point away from my partner and my heel is as, uh, as hidden as I can be so that I'm not just sitting here with no tension, nothing, and my partner exposes my heel.

(3:00 - 3:12)
So when she locks the inside ashi, I should be here trying the best I can. I can't turn back into the lock cause I'll break my own leg cause she's reaping, but I can to some degree turn my foot in a way which hides my heel a little bit. This will buy me some time.

(3:13 - 3:25)
Maybe you think there are three or four digs versus just one like, so maybe I hide my heel. She goes to dig and I make it a little bit more difficult, but eventually she's going to expose my heel and she's going to go and she's going to start attacking me. All right.

(3:25 - 3:35)
But I don't want to just give her a freebie. I want to hide the best I can until she digs the heel and does expose it. All right.

(3:35 - 3:57)
So we have to deal with our partners ashi karami, the actual configuration of my partner's legs. We have to move her legs into a position where I can at least hide my heel or just extract my leg altogether. So when she has me inside ashi, I want to start separating my partner's legs and looking to go into a situation where I can actually extract my leg or do something where she's not going to just immediately heal up me.

(3:58 - 4:10)
All right. So right from here, we're going to look to go and she's going to have her knees pinched like so, and I'm going to be in a situation like this. From here, if I see she's foot over foot like so, then we just go and we just grab the heel.

(4:11 - 4:18)
We split the legs. We separate. If I see she has crossed ankles, we go through, we grab the heel, we grab the foot like always, and we separate.

(4:19 - 4:36)
If I see she has a full figure of four, then from here, we go through, we can always catch through like so. We lift and we separate. Most of the time, the most common is from here, she'll have a semi-senkaku, crossed ankles like so, and she'll be extending into the far leg to make it difficult for you to do anything.

(4:37 - 5:00)
If I see she's locked into my far leg, first thing I have to do is post, scoot away, and move into a situation now where I'm in a relatively athletic position. Right from here, we come through, we separate our partner's leg as she goes to dig. As my partner goes to dig for my heel, we take our partner's foot and we just pass it over like so, and now we have the ability to take our two knees together.

(5:01 - 5:29)
Once our two knees are together, when she goes to start exposing me, reaping, doing all those things people do, we can use just a shearing of our legs like so to start separating our partner's hands, making it hard for my partner to grab in like so. We can start taking our foot to our partner's hamstring like so, passing this leg over, and now from here, pulling our leg out and moving away. The main thing is, the second I feel the inside ashi comes into place, first, I pummel my leg in.

(5:29 - 5:43)
If she's giving me an issue, then from here, we have to scoot, post in the leg, and pummel our foot in. We separate our partner's legs like so, we pass the leg over, and we take our two knees together. When she goes to heel hook me now, she can put all the heat she wants on.

(5:44 - 6:06)
There's no ashi grommy in place. And now from here, it's a pretty easy thing most times to just shear the legs and separate, or from here, as she goes to start moving around, she goes to sit up, pass the cross ashi wherever the case is, we come in, and now we can start playing games where we post on a hamstring like so, or we post on a hamstring like so. We pummel our legs to the inside, and we're out and away.

(6:06 - 6:27)
The main thing is, we separate the legs, and then our knees come together. Now, as she goes to heel hook me, she goes to move around, she goes to change positions, and we're inside, and we're safe once again. Another option we have now is re-pummeling the legs.

(6:27 - 6:47)
She goes into an inside ashi, from here, we're going to start going in and re-pummeling our legs from here. Now, a couple ways we can do this. Number one, if I see the legs are split like so, and there's an option for me to pummel through and to grab my partner's leg and take us into position.

(6:47 - 7:12)
Now, from here, we're in a situation where, yes, she has access to my foot, I also have access to her foot, and if she does put a heel hook on me, I can always clear this leg and go into a roll. Whereas, if I put a heel hook on her, when she goes to roll, her legs are locked in figure four, and from here, she can get broken. It's almost like the situation we pummeled into before from cross ashi, and we re-pummeled, and now from here, we can go in and start attacking her.

(7:13 - 8:09)
If I see that there's a space that's developed between my partner's two legs, and from here, I can hide my heel long enough, and from here, I can open up the legs, we can go in, and we can re-pummel, and we can go into a situation where we can beat our partner. Now, if I feel like the knees are close together, and it's going to be hard for me to re-pummel, now from here, I start doing things where I start scooting, I start opening my partner's legs, I start feeding over, and now from here, we go into a re-pummel, where as she gets to pull her knee in and switch to outside ashi, we control the upper leg, we control the lower leg, and we scoot ourself into a rimi ashi gurami, or it's a mitsu ashi, and other leg configurations, where now we can go into our offensive cycles, getting back into attacks, and using counter locks to attack my partner. So we can re-pummel either straight on through, if we see the door is open between the knees, or if the knees are close together, and we have to separate the legs first, open up the knees, and then re-pummel into various leg configurations.

(8:14 - 8:44)
Alright, another good option we have from here, is we can transfer her legs across to outside ashi gurami. So let's say for whatever reason, I have a hard time separating my partner's legs, I can't re-pummel, whatever the case is, from here this time, we go through, instead of going through and catching like so, we go around, and we catch the outside of our partner's leg, so when we lift, we lift both legs. Instead of going in here and trying to lift across, and then she can extend this leg and give me all kinds of trouble from here, we go around, we catch like so, and we just lean forward.

(8:45 - 9:58)
So if at any point my partner tries to extend her legs, I can always hip forward, and just pass the legs across into outside ashi, and now, once she gets exposed by heel, I can hide the heel much easier, okay? So from here, she has her feet either crossed, like so, what I don't want is to come through, I'm not going to say you can't work from here, you can, but from here, if you try to start lifting, your partner extends the leg, she covers the hip, from here, when I try to bring my hips forward, it's hard to pass that leg across, okay? So from here, we go around the leg, like so, and we grab the heel. Now when she goes to lock that leg in, even if she extends it all the way, it's a pretty easy thing to hip forward and pass the leg across like so, I'm not going to say you can't do it, like this, it can work, but it's kind of awkward from here, lock it, right, and extend, it's kind of awkward to pass the leg across from here, whereas from here, if you go around the leg, and I catch, now when she goes to extend, it's a pretty easy thing to pass the leg across, okay? Now, this time, we go and she has a full figure of four. Full figure of four, same thing, I just go in, I catch.

(9:58 - 10:45)
Right from here, my hips come forward, like so, she tries to expose my heel, and we just go in and we start passing everything across. I elongate my partner's legs, so I force her from a figure four into a semi-senkaku, and now from here, when she goes to back heel strongly, I just work down the lever, until from here, I can open everything up, pass it across, I force her to outside ashi garami, and now we have a much easier time hiding the heel and working into our escapes. All right, so now, bringing the knee down and out makes sense from here, because in all the other previous ones, we forced our partner into a reap, and then we brought the knee down.

(10:45 - 11:20)
She's already in a reaping position here, so this is the perfect time to hit the knee down escape. So from here, she feeds across, we go in, we move up to our knee, like so, so we clear our partner's feet, move up to our knee, like so, and now from here, as she goes to start applying the heel hook, I slip my knee out, and I sit back onto my partner's leg once again, and now from here, the story's the same. She goes to start moving, I can start pinning my partner's legs, separating, I can start posting if I want to, up on my partner's butt, and then eventually my leg comes free, and we're out and away, and we're safe.

(11:20 - 11:36)
So my partner's already in a reap with her legs, she passes my leg across from here, first thing is, I have to address this. So right from here, we go in, we heist. Now, as we go, we slide our knee out into the floor.

(11:37 - 12:23)
Right from here, I have a choice, I'm either posting right away, or I can separate my partner's feet, and as I separate my partner's feet, I just slide on through, we're out, we square, and we're ready to go. All right, so this time, she has a grip on my heel, the heel's gonna be exposed, you're fighting out of an outside heel hook from here, and we can go into a full roll, we can't separate our partner's legs, we can't bring our knee out and down, we go into a full roll, we create motion towards an escape, and as we do so, we palm on the legs, and we make a transition to feed from inside Ashi to outside Ashi, and that allows us to come forward and actually heel slip and make things a little bit easier. We can come forward, we can heel slip, or we can go into multiple rolls.

(12:23 - 13:07)
So, she has me in inside Ashi, I feel like from here, I beat the legs, I try to come up, I try to escape, I try to do whatever I can, I can't do it. From this position, she has an inside Ashi, we go to roll through, as we go to roll through, I V-grip my partner's leg like so, and now as I backstep, I just pass the leg over, and now as she lands, we're not in a situation now where we're in inside Ashi. Now it makes it a lot easier for me to go into a second roll, because my leg is in control, or, depending on how tight the lock is, it makes it easier for me to come up and go into a heel slip and fight from outside Ashi Garami rather than inside Ashi Garami, because there's no heel slip from inside Ashi Garami because of her leg configuration.

(13:07 - 13:16)
So I make a change in the leg positions. If I try to heel slip from here, I can't. I'll break my own leg.

(13:16 - 13:31)
So instead, I go into a defensive roll. She has inside Ashi from here, we go to roll through, as we go to roll through, I V-grip and from here, she goes to follow through, I force her into outside Ashi. Now, if I need to, I can go into a secondary roll.

(13:32 - 13:51)
If I have to, we can go into a secondary roll by opening up the knee and going into a rolling escape, or from here, we can come forward and go into our heel slips. Okay, this time, same idea. We went over this a million times, but same idea here.

(13:52 - 14:10)
If your partner goes to put a heel hook on, you go to roll, you feel like you can't make a transition into outside Ashi, or whatever the case is, you feel like you go to outside Ashi and you're still going to get broke. You can't come forward to your heel slip. You open up the knee and you go into a full roll, and that just transfers into multiple rolls.

(14:10 - 14:30)
The multiple rolls either bring the hands down and allow you to come forward and heel slip, or they weaken the Ashi Garami, the connection of the Ashi Garami, and that allows you to eventually thumb post out or post in your partner's hamstring and eventually get to an escape. So you start with the multiple roll where you finish it in the outside Ashi Garami, hopefully. She has a heel hook on me, an outside Ashi Garami.

(14:30 - 14:49)
She has a heel hook on me, and now from here, I have to go into a second roll. Or from here, she goes to go belly down, and now from here, I can come forward and I can heel slip. I either heel slip or I make the transition to outside Ashi, I open up the knee, I go into a second roll, and we start our rolls from inside Ashi Garami.

(14:49 - 15:16)
We transfer to outside Ashi Garami if we can, or we get stuck in inside Ashi Garami, and we just roll, we roll, we roll until we can eventually hit the pommel that we need to slip the heel or to clear the knee from our partner's knee line. All right, so before we move on to 50-50, inside or across Ashi Garami and inside Ashi Garami, very different than a re-meet and outside Ashi Garami. Obviously, different heel hooks.

(15:16 - 15:24)
There's inverted heel hooks there. There's just different central problems associated with cross Ashi Garami. Both of their legs are controlled.

(15:25 - 15:40)
It's very hard to build to a knee. It's very hard to put body weight on your partner, and they can control you for long amounts of time in cross Ashi Garami. And so the opportunity of slipping the secondary leg or just letting the secondary leg go is your basis of being able to go into your defences.

(15:41 - 16:12)
Until they decide to let go of the secondary leg or you can free the secondary leg in some way, it's going to be very hard for you to go into escapes, into re-pommels, guard passes, back kicks, any of that. So, some similarities here, but some very big differences in cross Ashi to outside Ashi and going from one Ashi Garami to another and then feeding ultimately into inside Ashi Garami, which gives you a cross Ashi leg configuration, but an outside Ashi Garami heel hook. So everything starts to get complicated when you start to move from Ashi Garami to Ashi Garami.

(16:12 - 16:27)
They have very similar, very big similarities, but also some very big differences. So now we're getting out the 50-50, which is completely separate from these previous Ashi Garamis, and then we'll go from 50-50 and move into mutual Ashi.