(0:12 - 0:43)
All right, now we're going into Cross Ashi. So we did Rimi Ashi, we did Atarashi, Tapo Shiro, now the progression to Cross Ashi. Cross Ashi is interesting and a little bit different format because it's gonna be very hard for us to build to our needs from Cross Ashi, and if we do build to our needs it leads like directly into a guard pass most of the time, so we're gonna save building to a knee and building to standing position, which building to standing position is pretty much almost impossible.

(0:43 - 1:06)
It's very hard on good guys to fully stand up from a Cross Ashi against someone who's very, very talented. They can just keep knocking you back over or inverting underneath you and exposing your heel, so I'm not gonna say it's impossible, but it's very difficult, and when you build to a knee or build to standing position, instead of going to escapes, you basically just go right to guard passes. So we're gonna save that for the passing instructional.

(1:06 - 1:26)
So we're basically just gonna do escapes from seated position. My partner has control of first both of my legs, and then going into Achilles lock defences, going into leg lace defences, going into heel hook defences, and then working from there into re-pommels, escapes, things like that. And then from there, of course, we'll go into Inside Ashi, then 50-50, and then Mutual Ashi.

(1:31 - 1:51)
If my partner doesn't have control of my secondary leg, just like in Outside Ashi Grommy, I wanna have my heel connected the best I can to my partner's hip. It's important that I don't point my toes and have my leg straight like this when I go to roll from either Cross Ashi or from 50-50. When I was in Blue Belt, I had my leg straight.

(1:52 - 2:05)
Someone went to roll, they went to try to follow me, and their weight came up on top of my leg like this. My leg was straight, and their weight came down into my knee, and because my leg was straight, there was no play, and I tore my MCL. I had a grade two tear of my MCL.

(2:06 - 2:24)
Just for safety, and for safety of your own leg, and for safety from heel hooks, you wanna have a bend in the leg. So if she does come up on top of you, number one, it's just harder to expose your heel from here. Number two, there's no danger of your having a straightened leg and body weight on top of a straightened leg.

(2:24 - 2:53)
So you just stay safe. You don't get injured without especially even being applauded, okay? So from here... What? What? Are you making fun of me for being stupid? I didn't say nothing. Why are you laughing? Who leaves their leg like this anyways? Listen, 2013, not a lot of leg lock information out there.

(2:53 - 3:05)
John, being the arsehole that he is, would only give you like 20% of the actual answer to the question, and just let you roam with it for like a year. He'd be like, yeah, I've figured it out, buddy. I'm gonna be an independent problem solver.

(3:06 - 3:18)
So I asked John questions. I asked John a question the other day about, I forget what position, and he gave me an answer, and I've never seen the answer before. I've never seen anyone teach it.

(3:18 - 3:21)
I've never heard of it. I never thought about it myself. And I'm like, man, that makes so much sense.

(3:22 - 3:43)
And I'm like, John, every time you ask him a question like that, I'm like, did he just make that up on the spot? Or you've been using that move since 2005? He's like, I came up with this one in 2003. I'm like, so you just waited 20 years to tell me? I've been training with you for 10 years, and you just never explain this to me? I have this problem all the time. You just never brought it up until you made me ask it.

(3:43 - 3:50)
He's like, yeah, I wanted you to come to the conclusion on your own. I'm just like, oh, thanks, dick. And then he starts laughing.

(3:50 - 4:01)
And then that's it. And then that happens like once a week, at least. So anyways, you want to tuck your heel in towards your partner's body.

(4:01 - 4:09)
You want your toes pointing away from your partner's body. You want your heel connected as best you can to your partner's hip. So when she goes to dig for the heel from here, that's not an easy thing.

(4:10 - 4:24)
If she is attacking your right leg, you want to make sure that you're on your left hip. If she is attacking your right leg and you are on your right hip, you have a problem. Whether she only has one leg controlled or whether she has two legs controlled.

(4:24 - 4:47)
Now, you're a little bit safer here, obviously, because there's no immediate exposure of your heel. But still, if your partner has your left leg or your right leg controlled, your prior leg controlled with her legs, and she clears this grip, she clears this leg, your heel is exposed from here. So the best you can, if she's controlling your right leg, you want to be on your left hip.

(4:47 - 5:04)
So now when she goes to expose that heel, even if she lets go, there's no immediate heel exposure here. Now you can't always do this, and your partner can find creative ways to force you to the incorrect hip and do things like that, but this is the idea you're looking for. So pointing the toes away, you're falling.

(5:04 - 5:09)
If your right leg is controlled, you fall to your left hip. If your left leg is controlled, you fall to your right hip. It's always the opposite.

(5:10 - 5:37)
And from here, we want to start hiding the heel by pulling it in towards my partner's body, pointing the toes away, and now we can start either our re-pommels, our rolling escapes, or whatever the case is. All right, so we're going to look at using opportunity to slip our primary leg out. Okay? So from here, she has, let's assume she has two legs controlled, but she almost always will come across Ashi.

(5:37 - 5:54)
She's good. And situations where she's trying to adjust her position, she's trying to lock up, and I feel like at any point, and this is a sensitivity thing as well, you'll be able to feel this as you go. As the more you're in this position, the more you play here, you'll be able to feel when you have the opportunity to slip the primary leg.

(5:54 - 6:11)
But maybe she's adjusting, she's adjusting her leg position, she's trying to fiddle around with passing my leg across. She's occupied with something else other than just wedging me in place at the primary leg. Okay? And so from here, when I feel like the primary leg is pretty loose, we can thumb post on our partner's hamstring like so.

(6:11 - 6:22)
Whether it's here, whether it's here, it depends. Or whether you just post on two hands like so. And from here, I just quickly extend my legs, I point my toes, and I just slip my leg out.

(6:23 - 6:51)
Now obviously, if she has a tension that she's supposed to have and she's tight, the leg will never come out. But as she's moving, as she's transitioning through these different positions and she's worried about other things and trying to expose my heel, many times from here, as she's trying to do those things, the primary leg comes out. Once the primary leg comes out, now you have to worry about her pulling you into an irimi ashi garami and exposing your heel with an irimi ashi garami or firing out an ashi garami and doing all kinds of things from here.

(6:52 - 7:12)
So once the primary leg comes out, we immediately find our partner's hamstring with our right leg. So now when she has to bring her foot to my hip and climb back towards me and pull herself back in, it's going to be hard from here. And now right from this position, we just turn our heel, we slip everything out, and now right from here, we're ready to go in and start playing.

(7:12 - 7:32)
Now I don't want to leave my leg out here. She shoots her leg and then she goes into ashi garami on the other leg. So the second I see this, immediately, we either just move back and away completely because she can't access the back of my knee with her knee or we palm off to the inside position and now we can come up and start playing our game from here.

(7:33 - 7:43)
So we just use basic opportunistic slips of the primary leg. And this one's really as simple as it looks. It just requires the correct timing and it does work.

(7:44 - 7:56)
Whether you use two hands on the floor, whether you use a thumb post, your partner's playing around. She's maybe trying to pack my leg across her body. We just pull the leg out like so.

(7:57 - 8:15)
And the second we're here, I take my leg and I fire it across like so. Once I fire it across, we're looking to strip grips and pull our leg out and away. And the big danger from here is if I get overextended, she can scoop this leg, pull it up, and enter the cross ashi on the other side.

(8:15 - 8:26)
So I can't get overextended in any of these positions. Once I go here, if I feel my partner is trying to pull my leg up, I just invert my knee. Now if she has to pull my leg up, the knee is no longer trapped.

(8:28 - 8:41)
If I'm here and I'm pushing, she just pulls the ankle up and now I'm in cross ashi on the same side. This is no good. So the second I feel my legs are free, she has to pull the leg up and just invert my knee.

(8:42 - 8:56)
So I can't allow my partner to re-enter into my leg by getting overextended in any of these given positions. So the second my primary leg comes out, she's going to move around and from here, the primary leg comes out. Right from here, we go in like so.

(8:56 - 9:10)
Now if she's trying to get to my hip, she has no access now to cross to arime ashi gurame. Now as she goes to start going from this leg, I peel grip, she's like, okay, I'm going to lose this leg. She goes to transfer, we just invert the knee.

(9:10 - 9:21)
Now when she goes to enter in, she can't do it. And now from here, we tie up her legs. Now we pummel to the inside and now we're ready to come up and play our neutral positional game.

(9:25 - 9:38)
Okay, just so we can slip the primary leg, we can use the opportunity to slip the secondary leg as well. And from here, she has my primary leg trapped. Okay, so getting ahead of myself here.

(9:38 - 9:52)
The primary leg, I know many of you already know this, but for those of you who don't, the primary leg from here is the one that's controlled with the ashi gurame. The secondary leg is the one that would be free if it wasn't otherwise controlled through my partner's upper body grips. Okay, just so we're clear on that.

(9:53 - 10:17)
Now, there's going to be opportunities for my partner trying to move around whatever the case is, the Achilles grip is loose. There's always going to be opportunities from here, especially when there's sweat involved, where I can turn my heel and from here we can just point the toes and we can just slip everything free. So instead of turning my heel towards my partner's elbow this time, because my hips can't really angle in that direction, I turn my heel towards my partner's rib cage, like so.

(10:18 - 10:54)
And so from here, I shoot my leg through, maybe she's trying to control me, she's trying to enter into my second leg, and from here I can use pumping actions, I can change pace, and then when I'm ready to go, I just slip the leg out and now I have to be ready to turn because my heel is going to be exposed. I turn and I hide my heel, okay? So we use the opportunity of my partner trying to finagle her way into whatever position she wants, and from here, exactly, we go through, and just keep the Achilles, and from here, we go through, we strip her grip, and then when we're ready, we slip out, and then we go into hiding the heel. So we can do it off of Achilles, we can do it off of some kind of pass.

(10:55 - 11:07)
If my partner takes a two-on-one ankle, for example, she tries to go in and starts to pass the leg across. From here, we can go through and we can start stripping our partner's hands. Now, if she's a two-on-one ankle, it's very important which hand I strip.

(11:08 - 11:22)
She wants to push the foot across in this direction. If I strip her left hand, her right hand prevents me from moving my leg in this direction. So the V-grip, the only way I can strip my partner's grip is the space between the thumb and the middle finger.

(11:23 - 11:35)
The only way that I can strip this grip is if I go this way. If I go this way, she just pushes the foot where she wants to, and now from here, I get beat. So when she uses a two-on-one ankle, like so, I have to come forward and I have to strip my partner's far hand.

(11:36 - 11:49)
So now when I strip it, she has to shove the V-grip down, but she can't. And now I can just open my leg up and go into my defences from here. We can use an opportunity of a grip switch where she goes to switch from an Achilles to a two-on-one.

(11:49 - 12:05)
I peel the grip and then we use that opportunity to slip the secondary leg. So she switches to a two-on-one ankle, for example. From here, I can come forward and grab the obvious hand, which will make sense because it's a shorter distance.

(12:05 - 12:18)
It'll just stuff me into a situation where she can control two legs. So I go forward and I grab the hand which is further away but makes more sense. And now when she goes to control me, we just slip and now we turn to the left hip and we hide our legs.

(12:19 - 12:49)
And finally, if she does pass the leg across and she switches to an Achilles, same thing from here. I can use the opportunity of a loose Achilles to turn my heel, point my toes, and slip my foot out and then I have to turn to my left hip to hide my heel. From here, if she switches from an Achilles and she tries to go for a heel hook on this side, we can slip out a lot of times and then from here we can go in and start to slip.

(12:49 - 13:47)
So from either one side of the body to the centre line with a two-on-one to the other side of the body with an Achilles, we can use opportunistic slips of the secondary leg to pull the leg free, to change pace, to pump, pump, pump to put tension, be relaxed, and we can change rhythm and pacing of the movement of our leg to create the opportunity to slip the leg out and then go into our defensive either rolls, re-pommels, or wherever you want from there. Alright, so let's look into one of the most obvious and common attacks that we see people getting tested with when they have double trouble in control of two legs, which is a leg lace. So she goes in, her idea is she wants to lace the legs, she wants my top leg extended as far into the lock as possible, so that way from here she goes in, she locks her hands, and now she can open up her body in one direction and she can point her knees in the opposite direction and she can finish with a strong leg lace.

(13:48 - 14:10)
The first thing I want from here is the second I feel the leg lace coming in, I shorten my top leg. So the second I feel she goes from an Achilles grip and she laces that hand through, the second I see this as she goes to lock up, I just shorten my top leg. Many times you can pull the leg all the way out and you can start rotating in this direction to try to start defending from here.

(14:12 - 51:25)
Many times you get stuck, so you try to shorten the leg and that's all you can do, you can just shorten the leg, but you can't actually pull the leg free. When she tries to go for the leg lace now there's not enough mass inside the lock because it's just your ankle it's not your full calf and shin anymore. When she tries to break you from here, there's not enough mass inside the lock to actually break you. 

So the shortening of the top leg will make it much harder for her to break you. That's your early escape. Now, if she actually locks it up and everything is in tight like so, from here if I feel like I'm going to get broke, the first thing I have to do is bring my hips off the floor. 

So as she goes to start bridging in and giving me some trouble, I just take my two hands to the floor and I pressure into my partner and I put my two feet in the floor. So now when she has to break me it's going to be very difficult from here. And now from here she basically just has to abandon it and what she does, she pushes back to the Achilles and now she gives me some time and I can start to go into my other escapes and re-pommels, things like that. 

So when I feel from here, she goes into the leg lace, she actually catches my leg and it's dead to right full extension, she goes in, she starts to extend I take two hands to the floor one, two, I push my two feet to the ground she goes to break me, it's not going to be easy from here and now from here we can go in, we can wait until she switches and now we can go into our escapes Alright, so now their endgame is where she has the leg lace, my legs are too far in so the upper body grips are set almost perfectly from here she knows my hips have to rise so she sets it up, it's strong, as I'm going to start pushing into my partner, she locks usually what is a figure four with her legs, figure four and now she opens up the knees so now when I'm going to start taking my hips forward towards her I'm carrying body weight and she's extending her hips forward, so as I'm going to take my hips off the floor they don't come up enough to actually alleviate the pressure and my feet are still dangling in the air, I can't get my feet to the ground the way I want to and so now as she goes to start finishing from here because I'm carrying her body weight and her knees are splayed if the upper body grips are set properly my legs are fed in there and I can't get my feet to the floor, I can't bring my hips high enough off the ground, this is the endgame from here I can't roll, I can't do anything that's going to save me from here and that's your endgame, if you can't if the upper body grips are set perfectly, your legs so far in there deep enough in there where you can't extract it at all you can't move around, there's no wiggle room and your hips are pinned almost to the floor, that's going to be where you get broke ok, so now let's look at another common test there, Achilles locks so she has an option to go with a figure 4 Achilles lock on the secondary leg just regular figure 4 or a reverse figure 4 on the Achilles and the secondary leg both can give you some problems so let's first start with the regular Achilles lock first things first, obviously I want to be able to boot my two feet so from here when she goes to start extending my leg I want to boot my foot like so, and if you have to you can even cross your ankles like so now to some degree you expose yourself to a heel lock which is what she wants, that's the lumbar she's playing but if you feel like she has a strong Achilles lock you can cross your ankles so when she goes to extend you from here she can't get far enough back on the lever to put you in a breaking position so the first thing is I can boot my foot like so if I feel like I have to, I can cross my ankles like so, and so now when she goes to finish me and she goes to put a strong Achilles lock on she can't get far enough back on the lever now if she actually gets into a situation where she gets far back into an Achilles lock and she locks a figure four this is no good for me from here what I want to do is start pressuring forward into my partner there's no rolling, there's no any of that from here because my two legs are controlled so from here when she goes to start moving back and away looking to start bridging in and finishing me I'm going to start picking my hips off the floor if I can and then from here I just get to my partner's hand so she wants her hand up high by her shoulder like so so I'm going to take off a lot of that pressure by grabbing my partner's thumb I physically grab over the hand and specifically over the thumb so when she goes to start bridging in I just pull the hand down and so without two hands from here she can't finish the Achilles lock so just focus on taking your hips off the ground the best you can, she's obviously going to be opening the legs going foot to foot, going figure four whatever the case is and trying to keep my hips on the floor but you can always come forward you can always come forward and get to that hand so from here I post the hand and now as I go to come forward she goes to keep my hips down she can do it to a degree but I can always come forward and get to that hand if I can't pick my hips up enough to get to the hand and I can't physically reach to the hand you can always come in and use two hands when she goes to break me we can go into the shoulder end of the lever, pull it down a few steps go to the long lever, then pull it down and separate the hands and now when she goes to finish me from here she only has one hand and we can just keep disrupting her gripping sequence until she eventually switches off to something else you're unfortunately in a very controlling position from here so there's no real escapes until your partner releases the secondary leg or you can free the secondary leg it's basically just me warding off attacks until one of those two things happens so what she does for an Achilles we pull the hands down, she just locks her hands in a regular Achilles and just locks hand to hand for example, then we just pull the hands down she does figure four like she should be I come forward and I get to that hand and I pull it down like so when she goes to a reverse figure four Achilles this is even tighter, and now from here I have a real issue from here my whole thing is I have to come forward and I have to get to that second, that top hand so when she goes to start breaking me from here it's going to be a further reach, but I have to get to this hand like so and from here I pull that hand down now from here when she goes to break me, because the hand's low it'll be much harder for her to break me, and I can even come through and start disrupting this hand if I can and pulling it down just an inch or two, and now from here we can start unravelling the hands. I have to be able to get to that figure four and address the grip because I can't roll, I can't do anything. If I go belly down I'm going to belly down Achilles, that's not what I want from here she can't force me belly down, I'd have to roll belly down but you can get broken from this position on your belly up, because of the fact that both of your legs are controlled. 

So if she goes to start breaking me from here, I have to come forward, switch to a reverse figure four I have to come forward and get to that hand and pull that hand down. Now when she has to finish me, because only one hand is doing the work, that one hand won't be enough and I just keep disrupting that grip, I don't let that hand get up high I keep pulling it down, I keep pulling it down, I keep pulling it down until eventually she's like, you know what, this is not going to work and she goes to transfer, and then I start my escapes Alright, so the endgame here is obviously going to be if you try to escape the pain and you start flailing and you roll belly down and you get broken with a belly down Achilles, that's an endgame there or if you can't get to the hands at all let's say they're doing a good job of splaying the knees and going foot to foot and you just can't get to the hands maybe they're pointing the knees back and forth, so every time you try to come forward, they're pointing their knees back and forth or moving to one direction, so you have to post a hand on the floor making it hard for you to get to the hands. If you can't get to the hands at all or if you can't get to the hands in time, obviously, before you get broken or have to tap, then that's your endgame. 

If you can get to the hands in time great, if you can't get to the hands in time, then you're going to get finished Alright, so now let's look at extracting a secondary leg and we looked at ways to extract a secondary leg So let's say the secondary leg is free we use an opportunistic we use an opportunity but they're moving around to extract a secondary leg or maybe from here, she goes to start digging for the primary leg, she lets go and the second your secondary leg is free, you have to start moving out in this direction so whether I free the leg and I angle my hips and I start going or whether she has the leg here and she lets it go and she starts moving, I have to go but if she has the leg shelved up on the leg like so, and now from here she takes this hand, she controls the knee, and now she starts digging the second I see my partner go for the heel this means she no longer has control the control she wants over my secondary leg so right from here, I immediately strip the grip like so just like we did with the 2 on 1 pass and from here, secondary leg is free, and now I can start my roll so the second you feel your partner is going for an attack on your primary leg she may have some control over your secondary leg but not the control that she wants whether it be here, she's going to Achilles and now from here, she unlocks exactly as she goes through, and now she releases whether it's shelved from the shoulder and now she goes to release, the only control she has is this grip that's right in front of me, I strip it, and now I go through whether it's passed across from here, she goes to expose, she can expose it from here but she's not really focused on the Achilles from here, this is the most dangerous one she's not really focused on the Achilles from here, she's focused on digging for this and so I use that opportunity as she goes to dig to slip my heel, and now we go out of the way and we start slipping so let's look at a situation where we extract the secondary leg and then we use that to extract the primary leg so right from here, the second we get into this position this is our starting position right here we want to get to this position where our foot's hidden she can't reclaim the secondary leg and we can start moving into this position like so right from here, a couple ways to extract our primary leg if the Ashi Garami is relatively loose we can just thumb post on our partner like so we can straighten the leg, and we can just move straight out and away this can happen, but it's unlikely if you're dealing with someone who's not very good, she's digging for my heel she's not really worried about the Ashi Garami, I just thumb post and I move out and away it can happen, but it's unlikely against very good people another thing we can do from here, I can reach in and we can catch our partner's leg like so as I catch my partner's heel, if the legs aren't crossed I can just open my partner's leg like so and now from here we can make space to put in our partner's hamstring now we take our two knees together as always now as my partner goes to dig for my heel, we just kick out and away and we dominate the inside position, and we're out and we're free so we have a choice of using a thumb post like so if you don't want to go into a full roll obviously we can go into a full roll, but if we want to just stay here and separate our partner's legs, extract our primary leg we can thumb post and just move out and away or we can come through if we can, we can get to our partner's heel and we can use that to separate our partner's two feet once our partner's feet are separated, we just pass the leg to the outside we take our two knees and legs close together now we just use that hamstring exposure to come through and come forward and start playing our game from neutral okay, so now we're always going to be looking to move in this direction as I start to move in this direction, my partner's always going to be trying to open up her knees in this direction to start exposing my heel whenever I see if my partner's knees are pinched in this direction that's the time for me now to start thumb posting to start pulling my partner's feet apart and separating like this, I won't be able to re-pommel from here but from this position, as my partner goes to start opening up my legs like so, I can a lot of times take advantage of the split in my partner's knees pommel one foot to the inside, catch one, catch two so I control the lower leg, I control the upper leg and I pull this leg on through now when she goes to expose my heel from here, we can go back in and lock our ankles now from this position, we're on the driver's seat yes, she can expose my foot if she separates my legs this is actually the finishing position that me and Keenan ended up in when we did our first match in 2016 this is what I finished him in she was actually Keenan well, she's actually me and Keenan actually beat me on the pommel so I was Keenan, she's me Keenan actually beat me on the pommel when he was trying to go into attacks I separated his legs and he was so caught up in attacking my legs he actually let his own foot get exposed and I actually finished him with an inverted heel up from here so yes, he can be finished here but if you cross your ankles, it's harder for her to attack you because her ankles are now crossed and her feet are exposed in addition, if you put in an outside heel hook and she goes to roll her legs are figured forward, she's wedged in place so you have the option now to go into an outside heel hook and you have the option to feed over and go into inverted heel hooks as well if she goes to roll that way, her legs are figured forward she can't, so she's wedged completely in place and you're a lot more in the driver's seat than she is yes, your legs are exposed from here, but at the same time you have a lot of good attacks as well so from here, if she points the knees and starts to go into a digs belly down then it's the time to start thumb posting start rolling and looking at separating our partner's legs doing what we did and what we're about to do but from here, before she goes to roll she goes to open up the legs, I just pommel my leg to the inside and we catch right behind our partner's knee with our shin we catch the ankle, we catch the knee, we pull everything through and then we put our knee behind and we pull our partner in and now we can start going into all the attacks and counter attacks to beat our partner like so worst case scenario, I go to pommel she uncrosses her leg, she pulls this leg out and now from here, I'm an outside ashi garami or she goes to pull her legs out, she tries to extract her leg and now from here I just let go, I pommel everything to the inside and we're out back to neutral, ready to play now this time we start to go into our rolling sequences and so let's say I'm trying to thumb post, it's not happening my partner's not opening back up this way and I can't separate my partner's legs I can go into a half roll start trying to separate my partner's legs where I physically pull my leg in, I get into this athletic stance here I start bridging forward and that pulls my partner's feet up and off the floor and that puts stress on my partner's ashi garami so now from here, the bridging forward will bring my partner's heel away from her butt and a lot of times from there, I can do almost a half roll where I come up to a knee and then we can push our partner's leg across we can bring our legs in, we can disengage we can go into all the previous steps from there so let's say from here, she has such a strong back heel from this position, where I try to separate the legs and I just can't do it if I bridge forward, if I can't pull the legs open from here, I can bridge forward I can use my hips to assist and I can pass everything across like so and now, either 1. I just bring my feet to the inside or 2. maybe she transfers to 50-50, whatever the case is but you get yourself out of the initial cross ashi and it gives you a chance to start re-pommeling, start going into attacks where you can re-pommel you can go into outside ashi, you can extract your legs you can do all kinds of things from there similar to outside ashi gurami we can go in, this time we go into that athletic position again, we can't roll if our feet are out here she can reclaim my secondary leg, I can't roll, I want to be in this position from here, we go in, we thumb post I start pushing my partner into this belly down position once we get into this belly down position she has a choice she can continue to start rolling through and start going in and trying to expose my heel and a lot of times from here I can start pushing back into my partner and forcing her hands down to the floor, making it hard for her to keep exposing my heel she's going to have, usually cross legs from here we can go in, we can put our knee down like so right from here, as she goes to start exposing me we can push our partner's feet down to the floor so when she has to back heel from here, it makes it difficult if she doesn't switch to an achilles grip from here and she just tries to keep digging for my heel, it's a pretty easy thing a lot of times she'll just slip my knee out and go in and take our knee out now, this is another sensitivity thing sometimes you roll and you'll feel comfortable from that position and you feel like your partner's dig maybe isn't that good sometimes you go into a roll and you feel like your partner can still expose your heel and if they do expose your heel, it's going to be difficult from there so a lot of times, you go into that half roll your belly down, and you feel safe from there sometimes you feel like your partner's still going to expose your heel and you think you're going to stop there, and you're like, oh, not this time and I have to keep rolling through, but just be cognisant of this your partner still has the ability to expose your heel you're trying to stop her from exposing but a lot of times, she still exposes and now you're like, oh, nope I've got to keep rolling, sometimes as she goes to expose and you feel like it's time, I can push my partner's feet down and now from here, as she goes to start digging for the heel my knee can come out in time, and we can move out and away you can also use this in a situation where we go to roll and she falls to her hip here, we end up in this position like so so now from here, we can push the feet down we can split the legs, and we can just take our knee and move it out like so once I split the legs, she locks her legs once I push the leg down, and I pull this leg up now from here, it's the easiest thing in the world to take my knee out, and now when she goes to heel hook me, there's just no way and now it's just a matter of time until that knee comes free and we're out and away, so we can do this from a double inversion position we're both facing down like so, and she's trying to dig here, most of the time, in order for her to go to dig she's going to want to fall down to a hip and when I see her fall down to a hip it's just a matter of pinning one leg, lifting the other and bringing our knee free so you can do this from either position, most of the time she feels she can't dig from two knees, she'll fall to a hip, and if she falls to a hip then we just split the legs here, and we bring the knee out and then we move out and away on our time ok, so now even before my partner has the heel hook she's digging for the heel, so if I feel like she's doing a good job of digging, and I feel like I can't separate the legs I can't do a half roll, I can't do anything that we just tried to work on, I have to go into a full roll and a lot of times multiple rolls, because she's digging, digging, digging and the same idea applies I roll, I roll, I roll, until I can either create enough separation with the ashigurami where I can slip my knee beyond her knee line I create enough separation in the ashigurami where I can separate her feet and then re-pommel, I create enough separation in the ashigurami where I can hit some kind of offensive movement or something that allows me to pommel back to a neutral position that's the goal, to create some kind of separation in her ashigurami and move her feet into a position which is more favourable for me so when she goes when she goes to start digging initially thumb post, and now we start rolling as we start rolling, we're going to roll one time that's it, we're going to roll two times, and notice every time I tuck my shin in and I'm in an athletic position I roll two times, and then we just keep rolling until we find ourselves in a position where our knee is almost free and then we can either thumb post or we can use our foot to assist or we find ourselves in a position where we land, we can re-pommel and we can go into an offensive cycle we do something where we go into multiple rolls creating motion towards an escape, and that motion towards an escape will allow me to either completely escape or to re-pommel my legs into a more favourable position and every time I roll, I land in an athletic position I can't roll and end up here, now she just exposes my heel sits up and I'm deep so every time I roll, I have to roll and end on my knee and on my shin so I tuck my leg in, if she's trying to extend her legs to stop me from rolling behind my hamstring extend her legs behind my hamstring and it stops me from rolling, I can't tuck my leg in you have to post in your partner's leg, you have to scoot and you have to bring your leg out, you have to get your heel to your butt and you have to be on your shin in this athletic position I can't have my leg outstretched in this direction, otherwise I won't be able to roll and she'll expose my heel, so right from here when I start rolling, she goes to follow notice, I land here I don't land here, every time I land, she goes to expose I land here, again on my knee ready to keep rolling, so I can create that separation and either extract my leg or repommel into favourable positions relatively similar to outside ashigurami she puts a heel hook grip in from here, I again want to pressure forward into my partner, I want to point my toes and I want to look to get my heel connected up by her elbow like so, and so now from here she wants my toes pointed towards her, I want my toes pointed away and I want my heel to connect to her body so the initial heel slip, the second she catches will right from here, point and right from here, I turn like so the way that I do this, which makes it effective is I push my heel forward, so my hips come off the floor slightly she goes to lock up, my hips come off the floor and I drive into her and I heel slip, and then we start our rolls if from here, she gets a high lock the hands come up high, and I feel like I can't heel slip same thing, I come forward, either with one hand or with two hands, I pull her hands down once the hands come down, they probably a lot of times won't separate that gives me enough time and space to be able to heel slip and then I start my roll it is unlikely from here, once she actually gets a lock in place that I'll be able to run second leg interference you see her knees are pointed down like so, it's going to be unlikely that I can finagle my foot in here in a meaningful way to actually separate my partner's legs so I'm not going to say it's impossible especially if she's here for example someone who's good will be here the knee will be in the way the knee will be on the floor so I can't get to my partner's leg if her knees are off the floor, you can run second leg interference by coming underneath your partner's hands like so and then now I can wedge the wrist in place so when she has to break me, we can slip so if her knees are off the floor, we can run second leg interference but if she's digging belly down and from here she exposes belly down it's going to be unlikely I can get my second leg in there so the initial heel slip, we'll have to be pressuring forward pointing the toes, pointing the heel, and tucking the heel in if her hands are high, I feel like the slip is not going to be possible we pull the hands down we pressure forward, we slip, and now we're ready to go in and defend so if we can't heel slip and we can't interfere with our second leg let's look at going into situations where we can separate our partner's legs now, depending on what kind of lock my partner has will determine whether or not I can separate the legs if she has a full figure four from here like so, and her leg is locked or maybe she has a shoelace off, I'm never going to separate my partner's legs so if there's a full figure four and she has a full back heel it's going to be unlikely that I can separate my partner's legs in time if my partner has a cross of the ankles it's still going to be pretty unlikely that I can separate my partner's feet in that amount of time it's going to be hard for me to separate this before I get broke, this comes on fast if my partner has foot to foot position this will make the break come on faster because her knees are higher in towards her chest and there's better breaking fulcrum but a lot of times from here, as I go to start rolling I tuck my leg in, as I go to start rolling from here my hips come up and I can capture my partner's heel because the legs aren't actually crossed if from here the legs aren't actually crossed I can separate my partner's legs, I can pass it over and now from here when she goes to break me, the legs are separated now the main issue I have from here is she passes the opposite leg across the 50-50, this is no good so the second we separate the legs I immediately come through and I just take my hand in like so so when she goes to pass the 50-50, she can't do it now I can wipe the leg off, I can control it and I can get to the hamstring when she goes to beat me now, I can always take my foot out pretty easily and we palm to the inside position so if the feet are finger forward, if the feet are crossed I'm not going to be able to separate the feet in the time allowed in order to actually not get broken and end up in a situation where I have to tap so from here, if I see she's foot over foot from this position and the feet aren't crossed in any way, we go in and we have to immediately I'm trying to slip, I'm scooting my hip out and we pommel our foot to a situation where we can start rolling from here she goes belly down, she tries to break me I'm trying to heel slip, it's not going to work, I capture the heel right from here I separate and I take my partner's leg up and over now right from here, she's immediately going to be trying to transfer to 50-50, so I just put my hand in like so when she gets to come across the hip, we just wipe it out and we catch, we post in that hamstring and now from here, there's no more ability for her to break me we pommel everything inside and we're ready to go so another option we have, this works whether my partner's legs are uncrossed or whether they're crossed they work equally well from here so she puts a grip on the heel hook on me, from here, I try to go forward I try to heel slip, the heel slip isn't working from here, we just go and we catch both of our partner's legs we hip in and we transfer it over to 50-50 and now from here, we come back in this direction, then we have to start scooting the corner getting to the head, getting to the elbow, which we'll work on in a little while when we actually get to 50-50. We can transfer it across to 50-50 which gives us better access to our partner's head and elbow and we can go in and start slipping from there so from here, this time, she goes in she has her feet either crossed or she's foot to foot. If she's a full figure 4 other way if she's a full figure 4, when I go to start rolling from here, I have to clear this grip like so. 

If I clear my partner's leg we can catch her leg like so and now we can hip forward and we can transfer this over now you won't be in a full 50-50 from here, you'll be in a criss-cross or you'll be in a criss-cross ashi. If you go into a criss-cross ashi from here and you try to sit and you go around the corner like so because of this leg that's inside, it'll be much harder for you to get to your partner's head and elbow. When she goes to splay the knees open and she starts to go either belly up it'll be hard for me to get to it or if she pinches the knees and then extends this leg, it's going to be hard for me to get to to scoot around the corner because she can extend this leg as I go to scoot, she extends the leg and it makes it hard for me to get to the head so if your partner's legs are figure 4 from this position, just understand this is not going to say it won't work but it's going to be much harder to pull off because you're not transferring it to 50-50 you're transferring to criss-cross ashi. 

When you transfer to criss-cross ashi, you run into some problems. So this is mainly used against feet that are posted on each other open or crossed ankles so from here we go through and we pommel in right from here I try to go into a heel slip I feel like it's just not going to work. We catch our partner's legs we hip in and we transfer to 50-50 then right from here we scoot around the corner we get to the elbow and we start our 50-50 defences from inverted heel hooks. 

So posted feet with foot over foot or crossed ankles it'll work with a full figure 4 it won't work but in order to start rolling and heel slipping you have to pommel over the leg regardless. But you won't transfer to 50-50 from there. You'll transfer to criss-cross ashi and it's still very hard to get to your partner's head. 

Okay so this is kind of your last ditch effort that you can try to create motion towards an escape but it's low percentage and most of the time you're just going to end up getting injured because you're just in the lock for longer and it's not a very good escape in my opinion So if she is crossed ashi it can work because it's kind of like your last ditch effort She is crossed ashi. I'm trying to heel slip. I can't do it As she goes to start breaking me, I'm going to roll with the lock and I'm going to try to start high-legging over in this direction Once I high-leg over in this direction you see clearly now your partner can go belly down and she can get even more body weight involved in the lock and break you pretty easily from here. 

Okay? So from here we'll try to roll with the lock The roll isn't to try to separate your partner's hands or post on the elbow or interfere with the second leg The roll is to create a full roll and create motion towards an escape. So if I can't heel slip and I can't roll in this direction, you can try to do a full roll into the opposite direction and then go back and heel slip. So what I mean by this is we can try to go into a full roll where I roll and I don't stay where I am and then let my partner break me belly down. 

I go into a full roll she goes to start breaking me belly down, I high-leg over we carry into a full roll and now maybe from here as she comes down and tries to break me, maybe the ashi garami or maybe the hands are a little bit lower, the ashi garami is a little bit looser and now maybe from here we can slip and we can use that initial roll in the opposite direction we usually do to create some kind of motion which will compromise either the tightness of the ashi garami and allow us to slip our knee out which is unlikely or we can heel slip back in the opposite direction off of the initial roll So it's a pretty low percentage and a lot of times it allows your partner to give your partner a few extra seconds to actually go into their breaking mechanics. So a lot of times you try to do that and you get pops if you're really trying to escape. I'm not going to say it can't work. 

So like your last ditch effort, you try to heel slip, it fails, so you go with the lock and then you go into a full rotation, you don't stay belly down you go into a full rotation and then as you go into that full rotation you hope you can hit a heel slip on the opposite side because you hope that the motion drops the hands a little bit or weakens the tightness and the connection of the ashi garami. But it's kind of dicey and you can definitely get hurt from there if you're not careful. Alright so one way your partner will stop you from going to that last ditch roll is from here, she has cross ashi as you go to start rolling your partner will take this foot out and she'll cover your far hip like so. 

So now I'm going to roll from here and I feel like oh man, this is just not going to happen from here because now the second her heel comes to the floor and her legs play, my hip is controlled from here Right from here your best option is you can't lay down and transfer it to criss cross ashi you might not say you can't do it but it's a very low percentage so instead what I do is because her legs aren't locked anymore, her ankles aren't crossed, is from here I just take a full wedge inside my partner's leg so instead of trying to high leg over, the heel slip is impossible because her hands are too high. A high leg over is impossible because my hip is controlled. So I have to deal with this wedge of my hip. 

So as she's breaking me keep in mind, you're getting broken this whole time this is happening so this is like a lot of things have to go right for you from here to escape this without getting significantly injured I take a wedge inside my partner's knee and calf muscle and from here we just sheer it out and bring our knee to the inside position once our knee is to the inside position, we catch our partner's ankle and from here we post on our partner's knee now understand, once our knee comes to the inside the biggest danger is I try to pull my knee up and my partner pinches her knees together and now my foot gets caught inside the ashi kirame as I'm getting broken so it's important that once my knee comes inside we spread the legs the best we can and we put a v-grip at our partner's ankle. So as my knee comes up and she gets to pinch her knees, the v-grip stops her and now from here as she goes to break me I can use a post and a turn on my partner's hamstring where I slip my knee out I can split my partner's legs and now from here we can pull the leg free, square up and palm of our leg to the inside so if she goes far hip ashi to stop that last hip roll, from here the second I see this I can't roll, I can't heel slip you're pretty much dead to right from here. The last option you have is from here I clear the leg from the hip I grab the ankle to control the upper leg with the post the lower leg with the ankle she goes to pinch the knees, I have to keep a v-grip to split the legs, so from here I can post now she goes to break me, I push, I slip the knee and now from here we can either square and pommel inside or pommel two feet to the same side of the body and now we're safe from here we can even go into counter attacks with cross ashi ok so now obviously our endgame is pretty clear from here. 

If you can't initially hide your foot, if you can't initially hide your heel if you can't slip, if you can't interfere with the upper body and you can't separate your partner's legs and interfere with the lower body, and you can't go into a heel slip in multiple rolls from here, and you can't go into a high leg we've gotten pretty much to the end of the road here so can your partner hold you in a static position long enough to break you which they probably can from this position if they have a good grip, and if not, can they hold you in a controlling enough position through your motion towards an escape to break you on the roll through, which they have a mechanically very strong submission so they probably can. So this is a very difficult situation to deal with and your endgame is very clear can they apply the mechanics before you either separate their ashi garami or feed to a position where you can get to the head and get to the elbow or can you do something to lower the hands to go into a heel slip and start to work from there