(0:12 - 0:19)
All right, so now let's go into toe holds. So that was pretty much all the Achilles locks we can do from a Rimi Ashigarami. Now we're going to move into toe holds.

(0:19 - 0:30)
So obviously very, very different. It's not a straight lock, it's a twisting lock. Some mechanics are different, the controls are different, things are different from here.

(0:30 - 0:55)
So let's look at what are the key mechanics my partner needs in order to break me and how to avoid those mechanics. Ultimately, she needs a coupled force of toes to butt and heel to chin. If she can achieve those two things and hold me in place in a static position long enough through the Ashigarami, then she's going to be able to break me.

(0:56 - 1:15)
Okay, so initially I'm finding the grip, I'm looking to slip the grip. Now toe holds, as we know from the leg lock instructional, the pressure on toe holds come on a lot faster because your hands are applying the lock. So I get a lot faster pressure with a toe hold than I do with a heel hook because the whole body has to move to apply pressure from a heel hook.

(1:16 - 2:12)
But because the whole body's involved in the break with a heel hook, mechanically the heel hook's a lot stronger than the toe hold, which you're doing with mostly just with your arms and with your hands. But because the toe hold comes on so fast, you can get a lot of good breaks and a lot of good pops from a Rimi Ashigarami throwing a toe hold on and just going with it and putting it on strong, and it can be very problematic. So the first thing is, can we slip the grip? Can we use a turning of our hips and of our leg and of our foot to slip the grip initially from having to lock the toe hold? Or if it's locked, can I separate the lock? Can I run interference with my second leg to give her issues if I have to? And if I can't do it, how can I go into half rolls where I can separate the Ashigarami or full rolls where I can roll, roll, roll, and then eventually go into an escape? And this is going to be the general idea of defending toe holds from a Rimi Ashigarami.

(2:20 - 2:30)
Just toe holding yourself. Okay. It's one o'clock in the morning.

(2:32 - 2:36)
All right. So now let's look at initially hiding our feet. Okay.

(2:36 - 3:01)
Ultimately for my partner to expose a toe hold or heel hook, they need my toes pointing towards them and my heel out and away from the body. So initially hiding my feet, I want to have my heel pointed in towards my partner's hip like so in ribcage and my toes pointing away from my partner. Okay.

(3:01 - 3:14)
So it's the standard starting position for this position. I hide myself from Achilles and from toe holds and from heel hooks. The further my toes start to point towards my partner like so, the easier it is for her to go into toe holds here.

(3:14 - 3:23)
Okay. So when I point, when I play this game here, I don't point my toes at my partner. So you guys aren't putting one handed toe holds, you guys aren't doing all kinds of things where she can start giving you problems from here.

(3:24 - 3:44)
So I tuck my heel in towards my partner like so, and I point my toes away from my partner like we talked about. If at any point my toes start pointing towards my partner, now I start to run into problems from here. My heel comes away from my partner's ribcage, my toes start pointing towards my partner, now we run into issues where from here we can go and we can start getting broken.

(3:44 - 4:06)
Okay. So just initially hiding my foot and keeping my foot safe from toe holds, heel connected to your partner's body at all times, and toes pointing away from your partner is a staple of safety from toe holds. All right, so now let's look at our partner grabs our toes, tries to lock up the grip.

(4:06 - 4:29)
How can we just slip the initial grip before the lock is actually on and it's tight? So she goes in, for whatever reason she gets a hold of my toes, and from here she goes to reach around and she goes to actually enact the lock. From here, as she goes to start locking your hands, I don't focus on trying to point my toes away. The toes are the long end of the lever.

(4:29 - 4:48)
You're not going to be able to operate the long end of the lever. So right from here, even if she locks her hands from this position, right from here my whole thing is I just try to take my heel and I try to just point it towards my partner and get the outside blade of my foot on the floor. Now I can't always do this depending on how tight our lock is, but I can try my best.

(4:48 - 5:10)
In addition, I want to scoot around the corner and I want to bring my heel and my butt as close as I can to each other. So when she goes to start breaking me from here, I just turn my toes out and away. I take my heel in towards my partner's butt or in towards my partner's body, and from here I just start to rotate and I walk around the corner like so.

(5:10 - 5:27)
I just slip the grip inside. The second I feel her go to lock up, immediately I want this motion. If I try to point the toes, everyone tries to point the toes, and she grabs the long end of the lever and she goes to start locking.

(5:27 - 5:53)
If I try to point my toes, the toes don't go anywhere, but the heel can move, and this is what I want. So from here, she goes to grab up, she goes to lock up. The second she goes to lock, immediately I scoot around the corner, I pull the outside blade of my foot, let go, point to the outside blade of my foot, here, the outside blade of my foot to the floor.

(5:53 - 6:12)
So when she locks up, I don't point my toes away, I pull my heel in and I scoot around the corner, and I just look to drag the outside blade of my foot to the floor, and that slips the hands off, and now there's no more toe hold. Now this is a sensitivity thing as well. I can't teach you this.

(6:12 - 6:32)
You will know after you have been toe held 5,000, 10,000 times, whatever the number is, can you initially slip this grip or are the hands locked too tight? This is just a sensitivity thing. You're going to have to do it over and over, and then you'll know, okay, this is not happening. I need to go into my secondary stages of defence.

(6:33 - 6:57)
So she goes to lock up. The second I feel her grab my toes, even as she's going to lock her hands, go ahead, I'm here, and now before she even locks, or when she locks and it's not tight, I've successfully forwarded off to the initial toe hold danger, and we can go to our escape from there. Okay.

(6:57 - 8:07)
So interfering with our second foot, I'm not going to lie to you, it does give your partner the ability to control your second ankle, lock double trouble, then you can end up in some more danger, but at the same time, if you feel like there's a tight lock in place and you feel like you're about to get popped or have to tap or get broken, running interference with the second foot can sometimes be helpful. So when she goes for a toe hold, this time on this side, and she goes to lock up, once she goes to lock up from here, if I can take my foot and I can either one place it here on my partner's elbow, so that when she goes to start putting the mechanics on to break me, I can push the hand further off, and now from here, it disrupts her ability to lock her hand and grab her own wrist that can aid me in escaping the initial toe hold. Or from here, if I can take my foot and I can physically place it in here as a wedge, where I physically take my foot through, I just catch my partner's wrist with my heel, with my left heel.

(8:07 - 8:22)
I physically take my left heel and I place it here, my partner's wrist. So now from here, once she has to start breaking me, she has to push my toes down towards my butt. It's a pretty easy thing to just push and separate my partner's hands as I pull my right leg, I scissor my legs in this fashion.

(8:23 - 8:32)
And now from here, we can pull one leg and push the other. So I have two good options. Okay, number one, she goes to lock up.

(8:32 - 8:43)
The best one is where I can get deep inside like so and I can get to the long end of the lever and get to the wrist. This is the best one. All right, but a lot of times you're about to get broke and you have to kind of push wherever you can make do.

(8:43 - 8:50)
This one takes longer, but it's more robust. As she goes to break me, it's a scissoring motion of the legs. I separate my legs.

(8:51 - 9:13)
Now what I mean by double trouble is you can scoop my ankle from here and now she's controlled both of my legs and now she can switch to outside ashi garami and she can come up to tapo shiro and she can start spinning the leg and give me all kinds of trouble from here. But you deal with one problem as it comes and if you're going to get broken from here, this is a pretty good option. If you have to deal with tapo shiro later, it's better than getting broken or having to tap right away.

(9:14 - 9:24)
So from here she locks up. First and best option is from here we go in and we physically catch our partner's wrist. We scissor like so and we separate.

(9:24 - 9:39)
Now from here we pull that leg out of there and we point our toes in the correct direction so she can't relock. Now this time we go in, she goes to lock up and from here I feel like maybe her elbow is tighter and from here I can't get through. I just don't have the time.

(9:39 - 9:46)
I just make do with her elbow. From here I push the elbow and as I push the elbow, go back. As I push the elbow, I separate that connection.

(9:46 - 9:54)
I back heel, I scissor with the opposite leg. From here we separate and we're out and away. Okay, so that's not as optimal.

(9:55 - 10:05)
It's preferred to go inside. A lot of times it's not this big opening. A lot of times she's down, maybe she's even on the elbow a lot of times or on the shoulder a lot of times and it's hard for me from here.

(10:05 - 10:20)
So from here I just post on the elbow the best I can. As she goes to start finishing me, we just scissor the legs and we separate and we try those first. We run interference with the second leg and then we see if we can separate the grip before it's too tight and then if we can, great.

(10:20 - 10:31)
If we can't, we have to go into our later escapes. All right, so now this time we feel like we can't initially slip the grip. We can't run interference with the second leg.

(10:32 - 10:40)
Things are getting tight here. It's time to address my partner's Ashi Garami. Whenever I see this, things are coming on fast.

(10:41 - 10:50)
She puts a toe hold in place. I'm like, oh man, this is no good. Right from here, I post on my partner's foot.

(10:50 - 10:59)
Whether it's here, whether it's here, it doesn't make a difference. Anything that clears it off my hip is what I want. Now we sit again over my partner's leg from this position.

(10:59 - 11:17)
We sit on my partner's leg right from here. There is a danger because you're moving your butt closer to your toes and your partner goes in and she starts cranking the toe hold and starts putting pressure on you. You have to understand that there's no Ashi Garami from here.

(11:17 - 11:24)
If you stay in this position, your leg will break. You can count on that. Your leg is going to break from here.

(11:25 - 11:40)
But because there's no Ashi Garami, there's no reason you have to stay in this position. Right from here, if my partner keeps her knee down or keeps her knees together like this, then I just walk out and over and I just straighten my leg. Now she has to break me.

(11:41 - 11:48)
Worst case scenario, you do one rotation and you're out. There's just no Ashi Garami. She can't toe hold me from here.

(11:49 - 12:00)
More than likely, as I sit on my partner's leg, she goes to the toe hold. She's trying to take this foot out and switch to an outside Ashi Garami. I start re-controlling my hips from here.

(12:01 - 12:17)
Whenever I see this, the second I step over my partner's leg, she's trying to win the pummeling battle, I just pummel to the inside position like so. Now from here, as I pummel to the inside position, I can either, one, go in and go to mutual Ashi. I don't recommend doing this because she has so much heat in the toe hold already.

(12:18 - 12:35)
There's not going to be enough time for you to actually enact a toe hold of your own to go in and actually start threatening her before your leg breaks and you're forced to go into a defensive role. From here, as she would start firing over, I just put my foot to the inside position. Even if she goes over, I just expose my partner's hamstring.

(12:36 - 12:53)
Now, when she wants to finish me from here, we just push, begin with a rotation, and now from here, our knee is clear from our partner's knee line, and we're out and away. Scary situation, but have confidence because there's no Ashi Garami. Once you step over the leg, you're out.

(12:53 - 13:07)
If you stay there for any amount of time, yes, your leg's going to break, but there's no reason you have to stay there, so you shouldn't stay there. From here, she goes to start moving out and over. I feel like, oh, man, I'm going to break.

(13:07 - 13:23)
From here, I clear it, and we sit on that foot. Once we sit on the foot, right from here, if I stay here, your foot's going to break. You're bringing your foot, your butt closer to your own foot, but from here, as she goes to start pommeling through, she goes to start switching to outside Ashi Garami.

(13:24 - 13:35)
We just expose our partner's hamstring like so. Now, a lot of times, I can just push in the hamstring, and because she's just controlling me with her hands, the grip just comes out. Worst-case scenario, she has a good bite.

(13:36 - 13:42)
Maybe your ankles aren't that flexible. Maybe they're injured wherever the case is. Worst-case scenario, she goes to switch to outside Ashi.

(13:42 - 13:48)
Even if she gets the leg over, it means nothing. She has to finish that toe hold. We just push in the hamstring.

(13:48 - 14:11)
We rotate, and we're out and away, and we're free. So you feel like you can't address the upper body grips, address the lower body Ashi Garami grips, separate the legs, step over, and then you're ready to go and create that post in the hamstring and move out and away. So this time, my partner actually puts a toe hold on.

(14:11 - 14:21)
I feel like I can't interfere with the second leg. I can't flip the grip. I can't even separate the legs in time to actually get over the leg and separate my partner's Ashi Garami.

(14:22 - 14:38)
So what I can do is I can begin a roll, and the beginnings of the roll will alleviate some of the pressure. And as I'm alleviating some of that pressure, I'm working on my partner's legs to separate them. So it gives me more time to separate my partner's legs because of the half roll.

(14:38 - 14:48)
So what this looks like is my partner locks a toe hold on me for my Rimi Ashi Garami. From here, I feel like the heat's coming on. If I tuck my leg in, I begin to roll.

(14:48 - 15:04)
Now, as I go to start rolling from here, it gives me time because as I'm going to start rotating, I'm creating motion towards an escape, which means it's harder for her to break me. So from here, as I'm going to start rising my hip, I post my partner's leg. Now, it's the same thing, whereas I'm not trying to move my partner's foot.

(15:04 - 15:14)
I'm trying to move my own hips. So from here, I start to roll, but I control my partner's foot. So as she gets to break me, I go into a half roll, I come up to a knee, and I separate my partner's legs like so.

(15:15 - 15:39)
Now, from here, when she goes to break me, because she has no Ashi Garami, it's going to be much harder for her to break me in this position. Now, as I go to defend an escape from here, you have the option of going into a full roll, okay? Now, as you go into a full roll, you separate your partner's legs from here, it's going to be harder for her to break you. As I go into a full roll, I'm going to do a high leg with my right leg.

(15:39 - 15:50)
So as my left knee drops, she goes to break me, I just high leg through, with my left leg like so. Now, you have a choice from here. The choice is simple.

(15:50 - 16:11)
I either come forward, if she continues the toehold, I physically strip my partner's hands off like so. Or two, if I feel like I'm still in the danger of getting broken, I can't get to my partner's feet, or my partner's hand, I just scoot back and I straighten my leg. Now, when she gets to finish me, I just post in the elbow, I pull my foot out, and we're out and away, ready to go.

(16:12 - 16:30)
You have to, have to, have to separate the ashi garami. If you try to do this roll without separating the ashi garami, she just follows you through and breaks you. So if I go to start rolling through, and I don't separate the ashi garami, I try to high leg, she still has a full connection.

(16:30 - 16:51)
You just let it outside ashi garami, you get broken. But when I separate the legs here, now when she goes to follow me, we end up here. Now I have a choice of sitting up, if I feel I have the time, I'm physically stripping the grip, or if I feel like I can't, I just straighten my legs from here.

(16:52 - 17:22)
Once I straighten my legs, I have the choice of pushing on the bottom elbow, and stripping, or pushing on the top elbow and stripping. So now when she goes to start pushing down and bringing everything in, I can strip pretty easy from here, and I can separate those hands. So she locks up, from here I have the choice, of kicking here, or if I feel like my ankles are really inflexible, they're about to break, and I don't want to push my toes down anymore, we just touch here.

(17:22 - 17:32)
When she goes to break me, we strip and we're out. So we do a half roll. The half roll gives us more time to separate my partner's legs.

(17:32 - 18:04)
That half of a second extra can save you a pop, a break, and save you a tap. So we go into a half roll, we stop halfway through the roll, we separate the legs, and then we continue into a full roll that gets us going and gets us out. So when she goes in, she goes to break me, I feel like I can't interfere, I can't separate the legs, so I start rolling, and now I'm out ready to start going.

(18:04 - 18:40)
Pushing on the elbows, pushing on the elbows, pulling everything through, and I'm out and away, ready to go. So now, this time we go into a half roll, we try separate legs, we feel like the pressure is just coming on so strong, we're gonna have to just go into multiple rolls. And it doesn't have to look pretty, it just has to work, okay? We're gonna roll and roll and roll, and the idea is, I don't just roll along the mat, I roll, and as I roll, I try to almost corkscrew myself out of the lock.

(18:40 - 19:00)
So I'm not just moving along the mat, I'm moving along the mat, and I'm trying with every rotation to move further and further away from my partner. But she's moving along the mat, we're not just rolling like this, as we roll, I move further and further away until my knee eventually comes out. That's the idea.

(19:01 - 19:27)
So this time, she has an irimi ashi garami, she puts a toe hold on. From here, we start rolling, and as we start rolling, I can't separate the hands, I can't separate the feet, so I just start going and I start rolling from here. As I start rolling, we roll through, we go all the way through, she'll probably transition to an ashi garami, or maybe she stays at the irimi ashi garami, she continues to follow me.

(19:28 - 20:09)
We roll once, we roll twice, and you just keep rolling and rolling and rolling until eventually we find ourselves in a situation where we're not gonna get broken, our knee is almost out, and then we can post on our partner's hamstring and start looking to make space and pull our knee free. Obviously, because we're filming, there's not enough space for me to roll 10 times across the mat, but that's what sometimes it'll look like, five, six, seven rolls, until you eventually move out and away and you actually move your knee out from within your partner's knee line. It doesn't look pretty, but it's what we always talk about, motion towards escape.

(20:10 - 20:25)
Okay, we're creating movement towards an escape. So when she goes to lock on, we go in, we decide we're gonna have to roll from here. From here, we go and we start to roll, she goes to put pressure on, we roll.

(20:25 - 20:36)
She follows, we roll. She follows, we roll, until eventually we just move the leg out and away. And it doesn't look pretty a lot of times, but it works a lot of times.

(20:36 - 20:54)
And you see, as you go to start moving, the whole thing is, I'm, when I can, I push on my partner's butt, my partner's hamstring, but I don't do that until I feel I'm in a position of relative safety. So I roll, I roll, I roll. Then when my knee is almost out, then I push on the butt and the hamstring.

(20:55 - 21:09)
So I don't roll once, and we're here, I'm trying to push on my partner's hamstring. I roll a couple of times until my knee's maybe here. So now my knee's almost free and that push, the push doesn't get me out.

(21:09 - 21:25)
The push is like the little extra, a little extra oomph you need in order to free the knee. But if my partner has a deep ashi garami, I can't push my way out of here. But if I roll a few times, that creates motion and movement that loosens the ashi garami altogether.

(21:25 - 21:39)
And now the push gives me the extra inch or two that I need to actually get my knee free from within my partner's knee line, and that gets me out. So I roll, roll, roll. As she's rolling, I roll one time, two times, three times.

(21:39 - 21:55)
I get further and further away, and then that last push gives me the ability to pull my knee out, and then that eventually gets us out. Again, it doesn't look pretty, but it's effective. Okay, so again, it all comes back down to time.

(21:56 - 22:13)
Realistically, we talked about this in upper body joint lock escapes and strangle escapes. With joint locks, you theoretically have an unlimited amount of time to escape because you can just theoretically let your limbs break and then just get out anyways. With strangles, it's a lot more about time because it just pass out and the fight's over.

(22:16 - 23:01)
But with joint locks, it's all a matter of time. Can I separate my partner's ashi garami or separate it enough to free my knee from within my partner's knee line before she can catastrophically break me? And so the question is always the same. Do I have the time needed to separate her wedging to a degree where she can't catastrophically break me? If I can't interfere with my feet, if I can't slip the initial grip, if I can't separate her legs, if I can't roll and create the space that I need before she can break me, that's your end game from here, okay? If I go through the whole order of operations, I try to initially slip, I try to interfere with my second leg, I try to separate her feet.

(23:01 - 23:04)
That doesn't work. I try to go into a half roll. I try to go into a roll.

(23:04 - 23:12)
I try to go into multiple rolls. Maybe I roll four or five times and still she's breaking me the whole way through. And then we land and I can't roll.

(23:12 - 23:48)
I feel like I can't roll anymore or whatever the case is. I'm getting ready to break and that's gonna be the end game for you here, okay? So the question is, can I separate my partner's hands at the upper body or can I separate the legs and the ashi garami at the lower body in order to create enough space where I can get my knee free from within my partner's knee line before she goes into a situation where she can catastrophically break my leg? Just so you guys know, we're not gonna go into defending from standing because it's not really applicable to do toe holds on someone who's standing. They could just put the foot on the floor.

(23:48 - 24:07)
On the knee, it's definitely a problem. And so just going on this very quickly, there's two different options we have from here. We can either separate the ashi garami and then go into a roll or we can just go into a full roll through, okay? So from here, I'm not gonna have a chance to re-pommel because my partner's breaking my leg from here.

(24:07 - 24:32)
She locks the toe hold on and from here I'm on a knee and I'm gonna get broke. So my two choices are, I either strip the grip off the hip and I go into that kind of knee drop roll where I highlight through or I can't do that and I just have to go right into a roll from here where I just throw my knee to the floor, I roll through and I go into a series of multiple rolls where I eventually get out and I get away. So you have two options.

(24:33 - 25:19)
Either separate the ashi garami preferably and then go into a roll where it's just one roll and you're out or the ashi garami stays where it is because there's so much pressure you're forced to go into a roll without being able to separate the legs and you have to go into one or usually multiple rolls to go into your escapes from there, okay? So relatively the same thing and same answer, just from a knee this time. Okay, very similar to the same defensive manoeuvres as toe holds. Toe holds, again, they come on a lot faster so they can feel a lot scarier because the second the toe hold is locked you can put instant pressure on it but they're not mechanically as strong as heel hooks.

(25:19 - 25:47)
Heel hooks are always going to break legs a lot better and a lot cleaner than toe holds will even though you feel toe holds faster. So with heel hooks, the potential to be broken catastrophically goes way up but at the same time, you have more time to react when your partner puts an initial heel hook because it takes longer to actually put the pressure on you with the heel hook. So we're gonna run through some heel hook defences now from a Rumi Ashigurami, very, very similar to the toe hold defences that we looked at previously.

(25:51 - 26:10)
Same thing for a heel hook, hiding the feet. We want the heel connected to our partner's ribcage, the toes pointing away. From here, the further my toes point towards my partner, the easier it is for her to expose my heel.

(26:10 - 26:30)
The further my heel is away from my partner's body, the easier it is for her to expose my heel like so, okay? So from here, I never want the toes pointing in towards my partner's body. You want the toes pointing somewhere away from my partner. The second the toes point in towards the body, my heel gets exposed.

(26:30 - 27:02)
If I touch my heel in towards my partner's body like so, and now our toes are pointing away, whether it's here, whether it's here, doesn't make a difference. As long as they're not pointing, if you draw a line from your big toe that goes out like so, as long as that line isn't pointing directly towards her torso, you're okay, okay? So same thing as hiding your heels and hiding your feet from toe holds, so too with heel hooks. All right, so now let's look at the initial heel slip, a little bit different than toe hold.

(27:03 - 27:26)
She exposes my heel, and right from here, before hands get too high, and again, sensitivity thing, okay? Just by looking at this from a third person, you will be able to tell the difference if her hand is here, but flex your wrist, versus if it's here. But one, you can heel slip, and one you can't. So it's a sensitivity thing.

(27:27 - 27:46)
You'll know after you do this, you know, 80 billion times, whether or not you can heel slip or not the second someone puts a heel hook up. I know the second someone puts a heel hook, I can heel slip, or nope, not going to happen, okay? So from here, the second I feel someone going to put a heel hook on, I want to look to heel slip. Now, what is a heel slip? It's where I physically turn into the lock.

(27:46 - 28:41)
Now, if her hands are so high, where there's breaking pressure on me already, and I try to turn into the lock, where I try to take my heel, relax, I try to take my heel and slip it past my partner's wrist, heel slip. If the hands are so high, where from here, I feel like I'm on breaking point already, and I try to heel slip and go into the lock, you'll actually aid her in breaking your own leg, okay? So that's why it's a sensitivity thing. The heel slip only works in the early stages of the heel hook, where your partner's hands are low, or I have to do something physically to come forward and pull the hands low, and then from here, I can go in and start heel slipping, okay? So whether the hands lock up, whether the hands are initially a little bit lower, and from here, I can post my foot on the floor, and now I post the hand on the floor, I raise my hips, I drive towards my partner with the intention of driving my head.

(28:41 - 28:58)
Straight towards her head, and from here, I just slip my heel inside the lock. So I can slip my heel like that, number one, so the hands are low. I post my foot, I post my hand, it's hard to heel slip with my hips on the floor.

(28:58 - 29:12)
So I take my hips off the floor, and I drive everything forward. My head comes right towards my partner's head, like so, and from here, I slip my heel in. This can be scary, because you are going into the lock.

(29:12 - 29:29)
You can break your own leg like this, but it's a sensitivity thing. You have to train with someone who you know is not going to break your leg, a good friend of yours, someone you trust, who can drill this properly, and not just ripping heel hooks on you as you're trying to practise heel slipping. They're ripping in one direction, you're heel slipping against it in the opposite direction, and you just break your own leg as you're doing it.

(29:29 - 29:44)
This is not the idea, when you're training, at least. You can also heel slip. Let's say the hands come higher this time, and from here, I feel like, I'm going to try to heel slip from here, but if I do, I'm going to break my own arm, or break my own leg.

(29:44 - 29:56)
So from here, we come in, we just catch the hands. We grab the near side arm, and we just come through, and we catch. We pull the hands down, one, two, three.

(29:57 - 30:07)
This weakens the lock, and it pulls our hands further away from our chin. Now from here, we post the hand, because the hands are lower, it allows us to heel slip. So the hands must be low.

(30:08 - 30:30)
If you see the hands and the chin are close together, the closer the chin is to the hands, the harder it's going to be to heel slip. The further the chin is from the hands, the easier to heel slip. So from here, my whole thing is, the second she locks it up, initially, before you can just tell by the feeling of the lock, you look at a relationship with the chin and the hands.

(30:30 - 30:41)
If the chin and the hands are far apart, you can heel slip. So I come forward, I heel slip. If the chin and the hands are close together, you know the lock's going to be tighter now.

(30:41 - 30:56)
So from here, I come forward, I grab. If you feel like you can grab with two hands and pull the hands down, or sometimes you can even grab with one hand, you can pull, pull, pull, and then you can slip right away because you have the post hand to come forward. Anything that pulls the hands away from the chin is what you're looking for.

(30:56 - 31:19)
So initially slipping, by either just slipping right away, or if you have to, pulling the hands down a little bit and going into a heel slip. Then because the toe hold is locked, just inherently differently than the heel hook, the second leg, running second leg interference is going to be a little bit different with heel hooks and toe holds. So she has a heel hook on me, like so.

(31:20 - 31:35)
This time, we're not going to go to a partner's elbow, push the elbow. It's not there for me to push, and we're not going to access our partner's wrist in the same way. From here, what I want to look to do is I want to take my foot, my heel, to the inside of her wrist, to heel slip.

(31:36 - 31:41)
Okay. So from here, we're just going to take the ball of our foot. We're going to place it here at our partner's wrist.

(31:42 - 31:50)
So we're going to wedge the wrist in place. Now, we're just going to take our two knees. We're going to lever our knees in this direction, like so.

(31:51 - 32:06)
As I lever my two knees in this direction, I start pushing towards my partner and bringing my hips off the floor. Once she goes to start breaking me from here, her wrist is wedged in place. So when I try to heel slip, there's no give and where the wrist can move.

(32:06 - 32:17)
And that makes it easier for me to heel slip. So I wedge her wrist in place. And now from here, as I lever my two knees, this allows me to point my right knee out in this direction.

(32:18 - 32:30)
Notice when I heel slip, my knee turns. So now I'm aiding that turn of the knee and of the heel with my second leg, like so. So now she has to bring her hands high and she goes to start locking up.

(32:30 - 32:48)
I just wedge the wrist in place and that makes the heel slip easier because of the fact that she can't follow me with her wrist. It's wedged in place of the ball of my foot and I have two knees aiding my right knee pointing out and my right heel turning into this position here. So now when she goes to lock up, I can run second leg interference.

(32:48 - 32:53)
Let's say her hands are too high. I can't pull them down. I feel like things are going south from here.

(32:54 - 33:05)
We just bring the second leg in place. When she goes to start breaking me, the first thing I do is I wedge the wrist in place. Second thing I do from here is I just point my two knees and I start bringing my hips off the floor.

(33:06 - 33:23)
When she goes to bring the hands up high, we just heel slip through and we're out using a second leg to run interference on our partner's grip by wedging the wrist in place. All right. So now we're going to look at sitting over her leg similar to what we did with the toe hold.

(33:23 - 33:35)
So she goes in, she locks up that outside heel hook and this time from here, we can't run the interference of the second leg. We can't heel slip. So we can't address her at the upper body this time.

(33:35 - 33:41)
We have to start addressing the ashi garami instead. So from here, we know what to do. We peel that leg off.

(33:42 - 34:01)
We sit over and we sit physically on top of my partner's leg like so. Now, because she has a heel hook, it's not going to come on like a toe hold will. If she goes to break your leg from here, she's not going to be able to do it because she just won't be able to because there's no ashi garami.

(34:01 - 34:14)
With the hands, with a toe hold, she has a lot more range of motion she can go through. And because of what the toe hold, she can push the toes to the butt much easier and she can continue to pull the heel. If you stay here, your leg is going to break.

(34:15 - 34:25)
But with the heel hook, she needs to have the full body engaged. So if she has to break me from here, it's just not going to happen. And so from here, you have a lot more time than you do with the toe hold.

(34:25 - 34:34)
Right from here, the danger is she throws her leg across my hip, scoots down to the ashi garami and now she has a heel hook grip. Now you're going to get broken. This is not good.

(34:35 - 34:49)
Okay, so from here, the second we find ourselves in this position here, I'm sitting on top of my partner's leg. I immediately look to start scooting out in this direction. From here, as she goes to fire her leg over, we just take our foot and we palm block to the inside.

(34:49 - 34:58)
If she doesn't take her leg over, then there's no reason why I can't just scoot out in a way. She has to control my hips and she has to move this leg. Otherwise, I'm going to, I'm going to escape.

(34:59 - 35:13)
So from here, I can bank on her pulling her knee in. I'm going to outside ashi garami. The second I see this, we just find our partner's hamstring to kick straight out in a way which is easy to do because there's no Achilles grip and we're out and we make our escape.

(35:14 - 35:28)
So very similar to the toe hold, there's actually less danger once you get over your partner's leg. She has really no ability to break you from here. So from here, we shift the grip, we step over, we sit over and now from here, immediately we start moving away.

(35:28 - 35:42)
You can always count as you start moving away, your partner will take the leg over because she sees she's in a dilemma. If I go to move away and she does nothing, I escape. If I'm going to move away and she pulls her knee in and goes to shoot outside ashi, she gives me the inside leg position.

(35:43 - 35:53)
And now when she goes to recover, there's just nothing there. And from here, we're in, ready to go. Come up, go into counter locks, heisting up, going in passing, doing all kinds of things from here.

(35:53 - 36:17)
Okay, so very similar with some slight variations from toe hold to heel hook. Okay, so very similar to with toe hold, we can go into a half roll. And that half roll and the half of extra, the half a second more that we get can sometimes give us the opportunity to separate our partner's legs when we couldn't do it from a seated position.

(36:18 - 36:31)
This time she locks everything up and I'm trying to separate my partner's legs. I can't do it. I go into that half roll and as I go into that half roll, it gives me the extra time I need to separate my partner's legs and move into this position here.

(36:32 - 36:48)
Now, once I'm in this position here, again, I go into that same kind of knee drop roll that I go into, where I control my partner's foot for as long as I can. I put my knee on the floor and right from here, we go into a big high leg where we go over like so. There's no toe hold grip now.

(36:48 - 36:59)
The heel hook grip is irrelevant. And now she can only either try to reenter my legs from here like so, or she can start to go into positional play. She tries to reenter my legs from here.

(36:59 - 37:15)
The whole thing is I don't want her casting her leg over mine and then sliding her knee under mine. So the second, she goes to steal the inside position by taking her foot over and inside of my leg. I just take my two knees together.

(37:15 - 37:30)
When she goes to enter into ashi garami, there's no ashi garami here. And now from here, I just sheer my legs, move away and we're ready to start playing a positional game. So right from here, she goes to start attacking.

(37:32 - 37:36)
I can't interfere with the upper body. The lower body is so tight. I'm like, oh man, I'm gonna get broke.

(37:36 - 37:44)
And from here, I separate the legs. I use that half a second to separate the legs. Right from here, I put my knee in the floor and I just give a big high leg over.

(37:45 - 37:56)
What I can't have is my knee coming to the floor, knee staying here and then she throws her leg back over and rolls me through. So the second I let go of my foot, you have to go. Same thing with a toehold.

(37:57 - 38:07)
The second I let go of the foot, it's immediately a high step through. But as she has to follow me, it's gonna be difficult. Now from here, I don't want her to reenter my legs.

(38:08 - 38:14)
The knees come together. She goes to enter, we're out. We're ready to play.

(38:19 - 38:27)
All right. So now same thing with the toehold and the heel hook. Again, it doesn't have to look pretty, but it has to get you out.

(38:27 - 38:47)
So whenever I feel I can't interfere with the upper body, I can't separate the lower body, just go into multiple rolls and try to roll, roll, roll and corkscrew your way out. And right at the last second, okay, there's not much rolling, rolling, rolling, rolling, rolling. I'm rolling and as I'm rolling, I'm looking to separate the legs.

(38:47 - 38:56)
Maybe I do one roll. And if they stay near me or around me, maybe I do one roll and then I peel the foot off. Maybe I do one roll and I try to peel the foot and I can't do it.

(38:56 - 39:01)
Maybe I do a second roll. And every time you roll, you look for little openings. So maybe I roll through one time.

(39:04 - 39:09)
Maybe I roll through one time. Maybe she stays in a Rimi Ashi Garami. She doesn't switch to outside Ashi or anything like that.

(39:09 - 39:14)
Maybe she stays in a Rimi Ashi Garami. I roll through. I can't separate the leg from trying to do it.

(39:14 - 39:22)
Maybe I roll through. And now a second time I come up and maybe the leg's a little bit looser now. And maybe now I can take my knee to the floor and I can high leg over.

(39:22 - 39:37)
So that motion towards escape a lot of times creates little chinks in the armour of the Ashi Garami. And as I go through multiple rolls, I can eventually go through and roll out. And if I feel like I can't do that, then I just go into a roll.

(39:37 - 39:44)
I roll, I roll, I roll. And that incrementally brings my knee out from within my partner's knee line. But I roll.

(39:44 - 39:47)
She stays in a Rimi. I roll. I keep rolling.

(39:47 - 39:52)
And then from here, my knee's almost free. And then eventually we can come through. We can start posting on our partner's hamstring.

(39:53 - 39:59)
Or from here, we can palm a leg in somewhere. We can post our partner's hamstring. And we can find little openings where my knee's almost out.

(40:00 - 40:13)
And then that last push gets my knee free from my partner's knee line. And we're out and safe and back to neutral. So whenever I feel I'm just beat, I go into multiple rolls and try to corkscrew my knee out from within my partner's knee line.

(40:13 - 40:22)
And then give that last push. Either with the hamstring post or the thumb post of my partner's hamstring or the foot. Anything that gets your knee out that last inch or two is what we're looking for.

(40:26 - 40:37)
So obviously your endgame is if you are rolling and you're getting catastrophically broken, which you can get broken on a roll. And you have to tap. And you have to tap if your partner's mechanics are that good.

(40:39 - 40:50)
Or if you find yourself in a situation where you can't interfere with the upper body, you can't interfere with the lower body. You're trying to roll, but the osteogram is staying tight. And you get stuck in a static position where you roll and you feel like, man, I can't roll anymore.

(40:50 - 41:15)
And then again, it's time. Can your partner hold you in a static position long enough to catastrophically break you? Or are their mechanics good enough to follow you through a roll and break you and hold you in place? So the question is, can you interfere with the upper body? If you can, can you interfere with the lower body? Can you separate the wedging somewhere either at the upper or lower body before they can apply the mechanics to catastrophically break you? And if you can, you can escape. If you can't, that's your endgame.

(41:19 - 41:25)
Okay. So now, similar, one more on her knee. She exposes my heel.

(41:27 - 41:34)
She locks up. She puts a grip in. Now, from here, you can try to peel your partner's foot.

(41:34 - 41:50)
If you can peel your partner's foot, you can drop a knee down and go into a high lunge. This is a good option as well. Now, if your partner isn't great, which is almost everyone on the planet at Outside Helix, you can come forward and you can physically grab your partner's hand.

(41:50 - 42:11)
You can pull the hands down and you can heel slip. If your partner's good, which is at Outside Helix, which are like less than 10 people on the planet in my opinion, she will always use her knee to bump you out in this direction. When you go to touch her hands, your hand goes to the floor.

(42:11 - 42:19)
If you don't pose from here, again, she reaps. She follows you through and she breaks in after that off your ground. So she puts you into level.

(42:20 - 42:36)
If you don't post, she follows you through and tries to break you. If you do post, then she puts heat on the heel hook and she forces you to roll through it either way. So if she's an idiot and she's just doing the mechanics of the upper body and she's trying to break me, not doing anything with the legs and I don't have a post hand, she goes to break me, go ahead.

(42:37 - 42:45)
I can pull the hand down and I can slip. If she's good, I go to access the hands. She occupies my hands, posting on the floor.

(42:46 - 42:55)
And now from here, I have to go through a roll through. So from here, if I feel I can slip, great. If I feel I can kill the leg, great.

(42:55 - 43:10)
If I feel like I can't do either one of those, I actually just start rolling from here. Now I have to go through those multiple rolls or I have to try to go through, roll, roll, roll, roll, roll until I can eventually escape or subsequently get finished. Okay.

(43:10 - 43:26)
It is realistic to have an Irimi Ashi Garami heel hook finish people from standing position. I finished Roosevelt in, I think, seven or eight seconds in ADCC from Irimi Ashi Garami when he's standing over me. So it is a legitimate move.

(43:26 - 43:41)
You can break people from here. So if I'm standing and she exposes my heel from here, from here, it's going to be much harder for her to break you. Okay.

(43:41 - 43:59)
Understand that because the person is standing over, there's no body weight involved. You have to have very good mechanics in order to break someone, which you can do it, but it's going to be much harder. So the fact that you're standing over the person means you have more time and you have a good base of support because both of her hands are occupied trying to heal with me.

(43:59 - 44:15)
They don't have to worry about her grabbing my second leg and off balancing me positionally from here. So from here, you have time. As she goes to break you, I just take that extra time and I post my partner's two feet, one on the ankle, one on the sole of the foot here.

(44:16 - 44:24)
And now as she goes to break me, we just separate the legs. We use that time to separate. And now from here, it's a pretty easy thing to heel slip and I can stay in the pocket and back step.

(44:24 - 44:28)
I can pull my foot out. I can go forward. You can do all kinds of things from there.

(44:28 - 44:39)
Okay. But understand that there is potential to be broken from here, but you have a lot more time to operate. You don't have to deal with your partner tangling up your second leg with their other hand.

(44:39 - 44:55)
It's the fact that both hands are occupied trying to break your leg. When she throws the Irimi Ashi Dorami up, from here, we use a V-grip here and a V-grip here. As she gets to break me, we just focus on separating those two legs.

(44:55 - 45:05)
Once the legs are open, there's no danger. And now from here, we can go in and we can start playing our game. We can back step or we can go forward into our partner like so.

(45:05 - 45:13)
Okay. Now, if you can't do that, let's say the mechanics are so good, you're like, man, I'm going to get beat from here. Then you have to go down to a knee and start rolling.

(45:13 - 45:23)
So if I feel like I'm going to have to start rolling from here, I feel like I'm just beat from here. I just drop my left knee down. I high leg over.

(45:23 - 45:38)
And then we start our multiple roll series where we go through, we start rolling all the way through. And we hope that we can create some kind of separation before our partner is able to break us. Those are the main ideas when someone's standing or when you're standing and someone's trying to deal with you.

(45:38 - 45:40)
I'm Remy Asagrame. I'm done with you.